# SEO RULES EXTRACTED FROM 5 BOOKS
# Use these rules to train SEOBOT's analysis engine


## META TAGS
--------------------------------------------------
1. search appearance feature (once you log into your webmaster tool account, click on search appearance, HTML improvements, and then go on to click duplicate Meta descriptions) to discover if your website is guilty of duplicate Meta data violation.
2. Implementing Page Title and Meta Description Optimization:
3. A page title, also known as a title tag, is the main heading that
4. Optimizing Titles and Meta Descriptions
5. tags. For the meta description, add the following line of code
6. page titles and meta descriptions to boost your website's
7. and location in your web pages' title tags and meta descriptions.
8. in your Title Tags and your description.
9. Optimizing your content means formatting your content using the H1 H2 H3 and H4 tags, highlighting important parts of your content in bold and italic. As a note, the title tags range from h1>h6 and each of these tags will enlarge your font and make text bolder and stand out at varying degrees. These tags make it easier to structure content for easier reader navigation.
10. On-page optimization involves enhancing individual web pages to improve their search engine rankings and attract more organic traffic. Key elements include optimizing content, meta tags, and multimedia.
11. Page titles and meta descriptions are essential for optimizing
12. The image above shows the different areas on-page SEO spans. We have already touched on keyword frequency or density; we will not dwell on it here. To make this on-page optimization guide an easy follow, we shall individually touch on each of these aspects. Let us start with Tags and Meta Descriptions.
13. content="Your meta description here">
14. Crafting Compelling Meta Descriptions:
15. : For better, enhanced rankings, place your intended keywords at the start of the title tag.
16. effective design decisions. Knowledge of keywords, meta tags,
17. . On the other hand, if your website is not running on a CMS, your best option is to edit your website HTML code and use the Open Graph Protocol to specify each tag as follows in the <head> section of the page.
18. page elements of your website, such as title tags, meta descriptions,
19. Remember, page titles and meta descriptions are valuable not
20. Because Google and other search engine pare the titles and descriptions, you have a length option limit. For Titles, Google search shows 60-70 characters of your title tags and 150 characters for your Meta description. You want to make sure that you,
21. . Write an optimized title and meta description in the provided fields.
22. Metadata fall into three categories: the title tags, Meta tag/meta description, and the alt tags.
23. organic reach. Include relevant keywords in your content, meta tags, and
24. . Title Tags and Meta Descriptions:
25. Your Meta Title is visible to users and search engine spiders and it is your first SEO infantry. If you fail to keyword optimize your title tag, you are dooming your content or website to SEO jail. If you head to Google and perform a random search, the Meta Title is the title text in the resulting search results.
26. regularly review your page titles and meta descriptions. Run
27. these steps to optimize your titles and meta descriptions using the
28. A meta description is a summary below the page title in
29. should have a unique meta description that accurately
30. and informative page titles and meta descriptions can attract
31. According to SEO Moz, if possible, and if it does not compromise user friendliness, aim to place your keywords first in each of these tags but especially the title tag. Doing this will give your website a ranking boost and a higher CTR (click through rate) because users are more likely to click on search result links that start with a keyword if the resulting search is highly relevant to their query.
32. titles and meta descriptions, you must apply these techniques
33. 4. Maintain optimal length: Keep your meta descriptions
34. meta description encourages users to click on your website.
35. Because it will be visible on the search engine results page, when creating your Meta description, it is a good idea to make it descriptive and enticing to readers; doing so will increase your CTR.
36. To optimize your content for search engine bots and web-crawlers, the rule of thumb, which is derived from the fact that Google spiders pay attention to these areas, before publishing your content, optimize your Meta data. Specifically, pay special attention to your content title tag and Meta description and ensure these two areas contain the keywords you are targeting and their derivatives.
37. Titles and meta descriptions are essential for search engine
38. "VisibilityMasters.com" ensures that every page on their website has unique and optimized meta tags. Clear and concise meta descriptions entice users to click through from search results.
39. search engine results. Although meta descriptions do not
40. In the early days, SEO primarily focused on keyword stuffing and meta tags. Websites aimed to manipulate search engine algorithms by using excessive keywords, often resulting in poor user experiences.

## TECHNICAL
--------------------------------------------------
1. We talked about duplicate content/URLs and their effects on ranking. Search for, and eliminate all duplicate content on your page. If you absolutely must have duplicate content, use the canonical tag to let Google bots know the nature of this content, and the piece of content or page they index.
2. https://meowapps.com/plugins/popular/
3. Every website changes frequently. Let us assume you have a web scraper developed that picks the relevant information you need from the website. When you run this script the first time, you will see that it works flawlessly. If you run this script repeatedly, you will see that you can perform tracebacks easily.
4. Submitting Sitemap to Search Engines:
5. 5. Data Structures — Python 3.8.3 documentation. (n.d.). Docs.python.org. https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html
6. "ExperienceOptimized.com" adopts a responsive design that seamlessly adapts to different screen sizes. Intuitive navigation menus guide users to relevant content effortlessly, creating a positive first impression.
7. , Matt Cutts, head of Google Web spam team, clearly states that site speed is one of their ranking factors. If your page load speed is wanting, which as mentioned earlier, you can determine by using Google Page Speed Checker, creating a 10k word helpful article will do you no good and users will bounce off.
8. We are going to work with a data set with information about adults in this section. You can download this data set from the following location: https://s3-ap-southeast-1.amazonaws.com/he-public-data/datafiles19cdaf8.zip. The data set poses a binary classification problem, and the objective is to calculate the salary of an individual using some variables.
9. Non-Canonical URLs and Redirects:
10. 7. Implement 301 redirects for old or changed URLs:
11. 5 Tasks To Automate With Python. (n.d.). KDnuggets. https://www.kdnuggets.com/2021/06/5-tasks-automate-python.html
12. A sitemap is a simple, yet effective way to let Google know of the number of pages on your website. This makes it easier for Google to index your site.
13. url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jbrownlee/Datasets/master/housing.data"
14. Jaiswal, S. (2017, December 8). Python Data Structures Tutorial. Datacamp. https://www.datacamp.com/community/tutorials/data-structures-python
15. https://cloud.google.com/recommendations/
16. python -m webbrowser -t "https://www.facebook.com"
17. python -m webbrowser -t "https://www.google.com"
18. https://au.linkedin.com/jobs?q=software+developer&l=Australia
19. Hiremath, O. S. (2018, November 14). A Beginner’s Guide to learn web scraping with python! Edureka; Edureka. https://www.edureka.co/blog/web-scraping-with-python/
20. steps to submit a sitemap using the Yoast SEO plugin:
21. . Visit the "Features" tab and enable the "XML Sitemaps" feature.
22. href="https://www.realpython.com"
23. URL = "https://realpython.github.io/fake-jobs/"
24. Generative AI, especially LLMs, are designed to provide a response each time they are prompted. If the critic isn’t carefully set up to check if the content is correct and to make adjustments only when necessary, it might endlessly make changes. Therefore, this requires careful attention because such automation could not only fail to conclude but also result in substantial costs. This could be a costly mistake, particularly if token limits in the LLM are set relatively high.
25. url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jbrownlee/Datasets/master/pima-indians-diabetes.data.csv"
26. . A canonical tag simply tells search spiders that one URL is similar or equivalent to another, which effectively lets Google know that these two URLs are not duplicate content and are in fact one.
27. your website's robots.txt file to allow search engine crawlers
28. improve initial page load times.
29. I started with a list of ungraduated students, and then using the while loop, I shifted all the students from the ungraduated list to the graduated list. I did this one by one. The while loop helped me flawlessly achieve this objective.
30. import sysimport requestsresp = requests.get(f'https://wttr.in/{sys.argv[1].replace(" ", "+")}')
31. Having variations of good pages, non-canonical URLs, or
32. https://realpython.github.io/fake-jobs/jobs/senior-python-developer-0.html
33. image": "https://www.dudescreative.com/assets/img/home1/digital-marketing-seo-web-design-agency.png",
34. (https://www.techinsights.com/)
35. Implementing Web Scraping in Python with BeautifulSoup. (2016, November 18). GeeksforGeeks. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/implementing-web-scraping-python-beautiful-soup/
36. 'https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-'+
37. . Submit the sitemap URL to search engines like Google, Bing,
38. "ExperienceOptimized.com" conducts regular audits to optimize images and streamline scripts. The website achieves faster page load times, enhancing user satisfaction and search engine rankings.
39. Include your images in your website's XML sitemap. This
40. Submitting a sitemap to search engines helps them understand
41. canonical tags to guide search engines to the preferred
42. sitemaps, and structured data markup fall under this category.
43. We touched on link rots while looking at the how to build back links. As part of your site-wide optimization, search and fix all error 404s, 301 redirects, and other server related issues.
44. https://yachting.ai/ai-yacht-boat-chatbot/
45. Python For Loops. (2019). W3schools.com. https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_for_loops.asp
46. Loops - Learn Python - Free Interactive Python Tutorial. (n.d.). Www.learnpython.org. https://www.learnpython.org/en/Loops
47. https://au.linkedin.com/jobs?q=developer&l=perth
48. Learn Python (Programming Tutorial for Beginners). (2010). Programiz.com. https://www.programiz.com/python-programming
49. <a href="https://realpython.github.io/fake-jobs/jobs/senior-python-developer-0.html"
50. webpage, use 301 redirects to redirect users and search
51. . (2021, July 7). GeeksforGeeks. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/decorators-with-parameters-in-python/?ref=lbp
52. Chikilian, M. (n.d.). Buggy Python Code: The 10 Most Common Mistakes That Python Developers Make. Toptal Engineering Blog. https://www.toptal.com/python/top-10-mistakes-that-python-programmers-make
53. . (2021, May 14). GeeksforGeeks. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-while-loop/?ref=lbp
54. src="https://files.realpython.com/media/real-python-logo-thumbnail.7f0db70c2ed2.jpg"
55. . (2020, November 27). GeeksforGeeks. https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/taking-input-from-console-in-python/?ref=lbp
56. https://whitecube.ai/ai-chatbot-nefi/
57. Masango, S. (2018, July 26). Web Scraping using Python. Datacamp. https://www.datacamp.com/community/tutorials/web-scraping-using-python
58. your website's files, resulting in faster load times. Follow these
59. Base URL: This URL represents the information on the website, and it is the path that provides details of the functionality of the website. In the above example, the URL is https://realpython.github.io/fake-jobs/
60. https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2023/02/google-search-and-ai-content
61. Buturla, E. (2020, June 5). How To Become A Task Automation Hero Using Python [With Examples]. Monterail. https://www.monterail.com/blog/python-task-automation-examples#:~:text=Reading%20and%20writing%20files%20is,an%20approach%20I%20highly%20recommend.
62. . Click the "XML Sitemaps" option under the "SEO" option in the
63. Reference: [DigitalCrafters Website](https://www.digitalcrafters.com/)
64. Integrating your site with the webmaster tool, i.e. submitting your sitemap, verifying your site, and using the webmaster tool to monitor your site and implement tips tailor made for your website can greatly affect your page rank position.
65. @context": "https://schema.org/",
66. href="https://realpython.github.io/fake-jobs/jobs/senior-python-developer-0.html"
67. Guideline: Prioritize user experience. RankBrain uses machine learning to understand context and deliver more relevant results. Focus on creating userfriendly content, improving page load times, and enhancing overall website usability.
68. slower load times. Instead, resize them using image editing
69. <a href="https://www.realpython.com" target="_blank"
70. url": "https://dudscreative.com/",
71. . (n.d.). W3Schools Online Web Tutorials. https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_datatypes.asp
72. Barnett, N. (n.d.). Web Scraping Using Python Selenium. Toptal Engineering Blog. https://www.toptal.com/python/web-scraping-with-python
73. https://meowapps.com/products/ai-engine-pro/
74. "TravelVoiceGuides.com" invests in optimizing page speed, ensuring that its content loads quickly for users interacting through voice-activated devices. Reference: TravelVoiceGuides.com
75. . (n.d.). W3Schools Online Web Tutorials. https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_tuples.asp
76. Message: "Finding a parking spot in the city is always a hassle."
77. Dunn, N. (n.d.). Welcome to Python.org. Python.org. https://www.python.org/success-stories/using-python-to-automate-tedious-tasks/
78. Miller, B., & Ranum, D. (n.d.). Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures using Python — Problem Solving with Algorithms and Data Structures. Runestone.academy. https://runestone.academy/runestone/books/published/pythonds/index.html
79. Images can significantly impact load times. To optimize images,
80. python -m webbrowser -t “https://www.python.org
81. sitemap generation, meta-tag optimization, keyword analysis, and
82. A site map, normally in XML format, is the treasure map search engines use to index your website. Without an XML sitemap, Google spiders have to crawl (read) pages individually, something they don’t like. A site map makes crawling your pages lightning fast.
83. Compress and optimize images to reduce page load times. Fast-loading pages contribute to a positive user experience and lower bounce rates.
84. https://aws.amazon.com/personalize/
85. Power, V. (2020, June 25). Top 10 Tasks to Automate with Python. ActiveState. https://www.activestate.com/blog/top-10-tasks-to-automate-with-python/
86. If you cannot build a stable script, do not use it. Most websites are continuously developing, and when the website structure changes, you need to find a way to navigate through the sitemap the right way. This is how you obtain the required information. The advantage is that every website is built differently, and the changes are incremental and small. You only need to update the scraper with the information needed by making small adjustments.

## CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------
1. However, the content it produces isn’t factual; it doesn’t provide actual information about the news. Instead of precise and factual information, it’s more akin to narrative text, barely related to the specific event or information. Not only does this not meet Google’s content quality standards, but it can also mislead your customers.
2. consistency in heading levels enhances the readability and
3. As search engines like Google became more sophisticated, they started prioritizing content relevance and quality. The emphasis shifted from keyword density to creating valuable, user-centric content.
4. A page title, also known as a title tag, is the main heading that
5. 2. Use Subheadings Effectively: Subheadings help break down
6. Optimizing your content means formatting your content using the H1 H2 H3 and H4 tags, highlighting important parts of your content in bold and italic. As a note, the title tags range from h1>h6 and each of these tags will enlarge your font and make text bolder and stand out at varying degrees. These tags make it easier to structure content for easier reader navigation.
7. 3. Maintain Consistency in Heading Levels: Maintaining
8. subheadings, <h3> tags for sub-subheadings, and so on, based on
9. title_element = job_element.find("h2", class_="title")
10. headings, but avoid keyword stuffing. Write for humans first and
11. SEOBook keyword density checker tool
12. options, including the ability to modify headings, fonts, colors, and
13. Use headings, subheadings, bullet points, and short paragraphs to
14. to check your content keyword density.
15. including headings, body text, and image alt tags.
16. Craft compelling and relevant meta titles and descriptions for each page. Optimize header tags (H1, H2, H3) to provide a clear structure for both users and search engines.
17. The <h1> tag represents the highest level of importance, while the
18. . Use headings and subheadings:
19. subheadings wherever appropriate. Use <h2> tags for the main
20. Hierarchical structure for headings that organizes content and improves readability.
21. headings concise and descriptive. While search engines
22. - Headings and subheadings are crucial in guiding readers through
23. Section 2: Content Quality and Relevance
24. We’ll also tackle the potential challenges you might face when implementing AI in your SEO efforts, offering practical solutions to overcome these hurdles. This includes guidance on maintaining content quality, ensuring originality, and staying compliant with search engine guidelines.
25. Header Tags (H1, H2, H3, etc.):
26. Use clear and readable fonts with appropriate spacing. Break content into digestible sections with headings and subheadings for easy skimming. 3.2 Multimedia Integration:
27. Header tags, also known as HTML heading tags, are an important
28. headings accurately describe the content they precede and
29. The debate on the ideal keyword density is a hot topic. In the early days of search, keyword stuffing, i.e. the intentional over use of keywords on relevant areas of your copy and website was a dominant ranking factor. However, Google Panda, a Google algorithm launched in 2012 changed that. According to Neil Patel, whom Forbes places on their list of top 10 online marketers,
30. Optimize your images, videos, and other media by using relevant keywords and tags in the alt text, description, and image caption (we shall look at how to do that later in this book).
31. Guideline: Focus on content quality. Panda penalizes low-quality content and duplicate content. Create original, valuable content, and regularly audit and update your website to maintain content quality.
32. HTML provides six levels of header tags, ranging from <h1> to <h6>.
33. "h2", string=lambda text: "python" in text.lower()
34. <h2 class="title is-5">Senior Python Developer</h2>
35. subheadings to improve readability. Vary your sentence structure,
36. Example: H1 - "Digital Marketing Strategies," H2 - "Social Media Marketing," H3
37. We touched on this. We mentioned keyword density is not as strong a ranking factor as it once used to be, and that you should use your seed keywords only when they do not appear spammy or compromise user-friendliness, we shall not delve into keyword density.
38. heading levels directly, such as going from <h2> to <h4>. Instead,
39. python_jobs = results.find_all("h2", string="Python")
40. h2_element.parent.parent.parent for h2_element in python_jobs
41. significant importance to the main heading, so ensure it
42. 1. Utilize the <h1> Tag for the Main Heading: The <h1> tag should
43. Use online tools or image optimization software to
44. understand longer headings, excessively long headings can
45. Collaboration for Enhanced Productivity: AI tools are shown to assist writers by suggesting word choices, stylistic improvements, and even generating paragraphs, enhancing productivity and content quality across various fields, including marketing, academia, and technical writing.
46. proper HTML markup, including heading tags (H1, H2, etc.), meta
47. the critical points discussed in each section. Additionally, headings
48. Ranking Algorithm: Google's primary ranking algorithm is known as PageRank, which evaluates the importance of web pages based on the quantity and quality of links to them. Google also considers various factors like relevance, content quality, and user experience.
49. headings, in search results. This can significantly increase click-
50. You can use free keyword density checker tools such as the
51. The best advice on keyword density comes from Copyblogger’s Brian Clark where he states:
52. 4. Keep the Length of Headings Balanced: Try to keep your
53. headings, and content, to ensure that they are relevant to your target
54. , (Moz is a highly influential SEO website and platform) there is no ideal keyword density value per web copy, and if your content is relevant to a user query, you can rank well by having keywords in your title and description tag, and minimal keywords in your copy.

## SCHEMA
--------------------------------------------------
1. click "Schema Markup. genarator" from the drop-down, and
2. Step 2: Generate or manually code the schema markup code using a
3. results. Search engines may display rich snippets, including
4. Using different types of markup for the same type of content can
5. common types of schema markup include:
6. Data Testing Tool or a similar tool to ensure that the markup is
7. targeted traffic. By providing search engines with structured data, you
8. JSON-LD structured data corresponding to the
9. 4. SEO-Friendly Markup: An SEO-friendly theme should have
10. determine the appropriate schema type.
11. Finally, steps to implement Schema markup in posts and
12. search engines display your content in rich snippets, which are visually
13. . Keep the markup code organized and readable. Properly indent
14. Structured Data for WP & AMP plugin, follow these steps:
15. Using structured data enables a feature to be present; it
16. page URL containing your Schema markup or paste the
17. information on schema markup validation tools.
18. Different Types of Schema Markups
19. actual JSON-LD markup code into the tool.
20. search results. Implementing schema markup on your website can
21. tags, and schema markup. These elements make it easier for
22. HTML markup. Use online tools like the W3C Markup
23. . In the search bar, type "Schema & Structured Data for WP
24. .Enter Your URL or Markup: You can either paste the
25. proper HTML markup, including heading tags (H1, H2, etc.), meta
26. plugin. One of WordPress's most popular SEO plugins is Schema
27. Tips for Implementing Schema Markup
28. .Paste your JSON-LD markup into the tool or provide the
29. friendly markup, customization options, compatibility with SEO
30. Fill in the details in the schema markup generator online
31. Step 4: Validate the schema markup using the Google Structured
32. implementations of your Schema markup. It might also
33. To place Schema markup on an HTML page, Here's a
34. 8. Test and Validate Your Markup: To ensure proper
35. .Create JSON-LD Script Tag: Inside the <head>
36. . Visit the "Knowledge Graph & Schema.org" tab and fill in your company
37. announcements from schema.org or Google for the latest
38. Schema markup is a type of structured data that is added to web pages
39. .Revalidate your corrected markup to ensure it's error-free.
40. sitemaps, and structured data markup fall under this category.
41. documentation or using tools like W3C Markup Validator.
42. Structured Data for WP & AMP plugin.
43. After installing and activating the Schema & Structured Data for
44. Step 2: Configuring Schema & Structured Data for WP & AMP
45. . Use the appropriate schema type for your content. For example,
46. Schema type for your content. For example, if you
47. Schema markup code snippet. And update the post/page that,
48. 7. Use Header Tags for Rich Snippets: Implementing header tags
49. . Recipe: Use this markup for recipes on your website, including details
50. Place Schema markup on an HTML page:
51. .Create your JSON-LD Schema markup.
52. Step 5: Monitor the performance of your markup using Google
53. make necessary corrections to your Schema markup based
54. . Local Business: Use this markup for local businesses to provide
55. search engines may introduce new markup types or modify existing
56. . Hover on the "Structured Data" option in the left-hand
57. Recipe schema type for recipes.
58. . Click the "Install Now" button on the Schema &
59. Validating your Schema markup is crucial to ensure that
60. . Product: Use this markup for e-commerce websites to provide details
61. To implement schema markup on your website, follow these steps:
62. . Be consistent in your use of schema markup across your website.
63. Structured Data for WP & AMP. To install the Schema &
64. .Add Schema Data: Within the <script> tag, insert the
65. Step 1: Installing a Schema & Structured Data for WP & AMP
66. @context": "https://schema.org/",
67. Go to the Technicalseo.com > SEO TOOLS > Schema
68. engines is to install Schema & Structured Data for WP & AMP
69. use the Article schema type for blog posts and news articles and the
70. want to markup a product, use the "Product" schema
71. . Stay updated with schema markup updates and changes, as
72. Schema markup makes it easier for search engines to understand the
73. . Article: Use this markup for news articles, blog posts, and other types
74. errors or issues in your markup.
75. .Visit the Google Structured Data Testing Tool: Go to the
76. your markup. It will show errors, warnings, or successful
77. Structured Data Testing Tool provided by Google. Here's
78. . FAQ: Use this markup to provide answers to frequently asked
79. There are various types of schema markup that you can implement on
80. Working with unstructured data obtained from different networks
81. .Make necessary corrections to your markup based on the
82. Step 3: Add the schema markup code to the HTML of your web
83. Here's an example of how to place Schema markup on
84. . Regularly test and validate your markup to ensure it is correctly
85. structured data will appear in search results, even if your page
86. On the search bar of easyseocheck.com, type Schema and
87. Schema markup Implementation is done from your end.

## PERFORMANCE
--------------------------------------------------
1. JavaScript files, and leveraging caching techniques to improve
2. website's performance. Follow industry blogs, forums, and reputable
3. compress your images efficiently.
4. your optimizations and monitor performance metrics to ensure
5. Consider using image compression tools, minifying your CSS and
6. quality backlinks that may harm your SEO performance and take
7. website's loading speed, such as caching plugins. Faster loading
8. However, when we want to fully automate and use this tool on an almost mass scale, it won’t be enough for us to have just some cases where it works correctly. We’ll want to aim for most, if not all, cases to be correctly recognized. That’s exactly what the k-shot method is for. It significantly improves the quality of results and model performance.
9. user's device. Here's how you can leverage caching:
10. Analyzing the performance of these pages helps you identify which
11. NumPy arrays are known as N-dimensional arrays, otherwise called ndarrays, and the elements they store are the same type and same size. They are high-performance, efficient at data operations, and an effective form of storage as the arrays grow larger.
12. Enable compression by using Gzip or other compression tools.
13. Console to gather data on your website's performance, including
14. Naturally optimizing your internal links relevant to your keywords can make a huge difference on your ranking. When building internal links, here is the rule: create silo pages, silo pages are pages that connect to categories and supporting posts and pages. Silo pages aggregate your ranking and boost your search performance because after creating silo pages, when you link back to say, your homepage, the linking juice flows through supporting pages and categories.
15. New data is continuously being generated, and providing machine learning models with the new data helps them upgrade over time, become more accurate, and continuously improve their performance. This leads to continually better decisions being made.
16. most organic traffic and analyze their performance metrics, such as
17. negatively affect your website's performance and search engine
18. offer valuable insights into your website's performance,
19. Ensure the compressed files are correctly delivered to the
20. Most columns in the data set can be used to perform an analysis. For instance, if you look at the output from the web scraping of the job positions, you will see the data set has a lot of information about jobs, including the word “Python” and “software developer.” You, however, only want some information from this data set. You can remove these categories to reduce the amount of space taken up by the data set, thereby improving the program's performance.
21. allow you to compare your website's performance with your
22. "ROIBoosters.com" conducts keyword audits to identify high-impact keywords. Landing pages are optimized based on performance data, ensuring that efforts align with maximizing ROI.
23. Enabling Gzip compression can significantly reduce the size of
24. your website's performance in search engine rankings.
25. performance, you can identify strengths and weaknesses, make
26. You can effectively monitor and analyze your SEO performance by
27. minimizing external scripts' use, and compressing your code.
28. Regularly track your keyword performance to ensure ongoing
29. Compress your images to reduce their file size without
30. You can even specify how to represent missing or NaN values – you may or may not want the header outputted, you may or may not want the row names written, you may want compression, and so on. You can find out how to do all that by reading
31. As a rule, optimize your images by compressing them and making them smaller as a way to ensure they do not affect your page load speed. To optimize your media, you can employ tools such as
32. Enable caching on the server-side using technologies like
33. performance, and user experience is crucial. Ensure that your
34. performance of your websites and applications. Regularly test
35. optimize your theme for better SEO performance. Conclusion:
36. and performance of your websites and applications is crucial. In
37. Quantifying the model performance requires the use of evaluation metrics, and which ones you use depend on what kind of task you are doing – regression, classification, clustering, and so on. Some metrics are good for multiple tasks, such as precision-recall. Classification, regression, and other supervised learning tasks make up the largest number of machine learning applications, so we will concentrate on regression and classification
38. Techniques for providing examples to improve AI performance
39. Model evaluation methods fall into two distinct categories – cross-validation and holdout. Both use test sets, which are datasets of completely new, previously unseen data, to evaluate the performance. As you already know by now, using the same data you train a model on to test it is not recommended because the model will not learn anything – it will simply memorize what you trained it on. The predictions will always be correct anywhere in the training set. This is called overfitting.
40. Google considers links as votes of confidence: when different, high quality sites link back to your website, it tells Google that other webmasters/users find your content helpful. Thus, it boosts your ranking because being helpful is an integral part of Google mission statement.
41. Utilize browser caching to store static elements locally.
42. Avoid unnecessary database calls by caching frequently
43. experience. Slow loading times and laggy performance can drive
44. Implement AI-driven tools that continuously analyze content performance and suggest optimizations for improved search engine rankings.
45. Step 5: Monitor the performance of your markup using Google
46. constantly evolving. To maintain optimal performance,
47. your website's loading speed by compressing images, minifying
48. Minify CSS and JavaScript files to remove unnecessary
49. performance and optimize the website for search engines.
50. them into your content, closely monitor their performance.
51. steps to enable Gzip compression:
52. Understanding the performance of your website's SEO (Search
53. : This one is major. Google uses backlinks as votes of confidence: more domains linking back to your site=better rankings.
54. Compress images using tools like Adobe Photoshop, TinyPNG, or
55. served to filter sites that used spammy linking to manipulate ranking. In particular, the Penguin update sought to identify sites that bought backlinks, or used link networks to gather ‘votes of confidence’ to manipulate ranking.
56. Other than optimized and compressed media, your website structure, code, and navigation also determine your page load speed. Thus, your website should have clean, search and user-friendly code, and navigation; this will ensure users stay longer on your site, which Google will treat as a sign of trust and usefulness.
57. In an ideal world, a model’s estimated performance will tell us if the model performs well on unseen data or not. Most of the time, we will be building models to predict on future data and, before a metric is chosen, you must understand the context – each model will use different datasets and different objectives to solve the problem.
58. A confusion matrix is a table we use when we want the performance of our classification model evaluated. You can also use it to visualize an algorithm's performance.  A confusion matrix shows a class-wise summing up of the correct and incorrect predictions:
59. Implement browser caching by setting long expiration dates for
60. Analyzing your competitors' SEO performance can provide valuable
61. Caching can significantly improve the performance of your
62. host of other image compression tools
63. Backlinks act as a vote of confidence and trust from one website to another. Search engines view these links as endorsements, considering them as signals of valuable and relevant content. Websites with a robust backlink profile are often rewarded with higher search rankings.
64. This performance metric measures how well binary classifiers discriminate between positive classes and negative ones.:
65. Test the compression using online tools like GTmetrix or
66. improve the speed and performance of your digital products.
67. Pages" section to view data on landing page performance. Look for
68. Logarithmic loss is also called logloss, and it is used to measure a classification model's performance where a probability value between 0 and 1 is used as the prediction input. With a divergence between the predicted probability and the actual label,  we saw an increase in log loss. That value needs to be minimized by the machine learning model – the smaller the logloss, the better, and the best models have a log loss of 0.
69. this subset of the dataset is used to assess the model's performance. It gives us a test platform that allows us to fine-tune the parameters for our model and choose the model that performs the best. Be aware that you won't need a validation set for every single algorithm.
70. In today's fast-paced digital world, the speed and performance of
71. your website. Tracking the performance of your target keywords allows
72. : Creators should evaluate their content for originality, depth, insightfulness, and overall quality. Consider external audits to understand the impact on search performance.
73. Holdout evaluation tests models on different data to the training data, providing an unbiased learning performance estimate. The dataset will be divided into three random subsets:
74. The performance metrics from the test and predicted data are compared
75. Compress and optimize images to reduce page load times. Fast-loading pages contribute to a positive user experience and lower bounce rates.
76. significant impact on website performance. Consider the following
77. performance, you must install a web analytics tool on your
78. traffic, user behaviour, and search engine performance. To set up
79. code, and using caching techniques. This will improve the overall
80. - This is a general chatbot that can be quickly trained on your knowledge base, whether it’s a PDF document, a website, or a text file. It’s a general chat from the company that I’ve used, adapted for my industry. What I like about it is its speed and lightweight nature, with minimal JS and CSS, making it highly optimized and importantly, won’t impact our website’s performance, which is crucial for SEO. The downside is, of course, that it’s a general-purpose chat.
81. Optimizing queries can greatly improve performance if your
82. . Analyze Landing Page Performance

## KEYWORDS
--------------------------------------------------
1. Section 2: Long-Tail Keywords and Conversational Content
2. Keyword research tools are invaluable for gathering data and
3. “The Panda algorithm update changed the SEO world. It changed content strategy, keyword research, and targeting. It even changed how marketers build links, since high-quality relevant links pointing to a webpage ultimately add to its value. By rolling out Panda, Google could now determine more accurately which sites were “spammy” and which sites would likely be deemed useful by visitors.”
4. Although the importance of keywords largely depends on their intended use, the following are some telling reasons why keyword research is such an important part of SEO.
5. information about your website's content. Effective keyword research
6. Any SEO worth the name (SEO is the name given to search engine optimization experts) will tell you this much: keyword research is perhaps the most important aspect of SEO. While Google may not outright state it, their algorithm pays attention to keywords, perhaps not their chronic use, but their placement on different areas of your website elements, and how helpful your keyword-optimized content is to the users.
7. A Step-By-Step, 2016 and Beyond Keyword Research Guide for Top Google Ranking
8. Keyword research and selection are vital for effective SEO and
9. competition, considering search intent, and refining your
10. The Importance of Keyword Research
11. Conduct thorough keyword research to identify high-potential keywords relevant to your content. Focus on both short-tail and long-tail keywords to capture a diverse audience.
12. SEMrush: SEMrush offers comprehensive keyword research
13. Good keywords, the ones you remain with at the end of the 4-step keyword research guide should be highly relevant. They should accurately describe the content of your articles because a high bounce rate, i.e. the rate at which users leave your page after landing on it is yet another external ranking factor. By being specific, your keywords and their subsequent use ensures that users find answers to their pressing questions once they land on your page or content.
14. Step 4: Use Your Keyword Research Tool to Focus Your List
15. "TravelVoiceGuides.com" identifies long-tail voice search keywords like "What are the must-visit places in Europe?" and tailors content to provide comprehensive answers to such queries.
16. As we saw earlier while looking at our acne example, performing keyword research allows you to analyze the popularity, and competiveness of your intended keywords. For instance, in our acne example, by using Google AdWords, we saw that keywords in the ‘best acne’ keyword cluster are highly competitive and have a high search volume, while keywords in the ‘acne home, and cystic acne’ clusters had lower competition and marginal search volume.
17. One false statement peddled by SEO ‘gurus’ is that keyword research is the hardest part of SEO. While it does require an infinite amount of time on a continuous basis (search data and volumes change on a daily-monthly basis), coming up with a list of good keywords your website can rank for on the first page of Google SERP is not rocket science. In fact, as the next subsection will show, you can easily come up with a massive list of keywords by following a few simple steps.
18. i. Keyword Research: Keyword research involves identifying the terms or
19. First, equipped with your intended optimization keyword, head over to Google and type your intended keyword. For instance, if we use ‘keyword research’ as our seed keyword, our top 4 results would be as follows:
20. Before diving into keyword research, it is essential to have a
21. does is take your seed keyword, plug it into the ‘positive filter’ box, then press the ‘shit keywords!’ option, and download your list of keywords if it so pleases you. For instance, using a ‘keyword research’ spreadsheet created earlier, by plugging the keywords in Keyword Shitter, as shown by the figure below, we can get a ton of expanded ideas of topics we can create content around.
22. Consider using long-tail keywords with lower search volume
23. Conduct keyword research to identify your topic's most
24. topics you want to cover, conduct keyword research to identify
25. Conduct keyword research focusing on long-tail, conversational phrases that users are likely to speak. Consider questions and answers that align with your content.
26. using keyword research tools, analyzing search volume and
27. Here is the thing; the role of a keyword research tool is to give you an estimate of the specific monthly searches keywords you intend to rank for have. The idea behind using a keyword research tool is to eliminate keywords that are too competitive, that have minimal traffic volumes, and that do not naturally fit into your blog content.
28. Using this data, we can determine that trying to rank for keywords in the ‘best acne’ cluster would be an uphill task. On the other hand, by creating highly helpful content, it is possible to rank on the first page of Google for keywords in the less competitive keyword clusters. This is what keyword research allows you to do: it helps you determine the search volume and competitiveness of specific keywords. This helps you determine if trying to rank for the keyword is worthwhile.
29. Step 1: Perform Content Driven Keyword Research
30. "DataInnovateTech.com" employs an AI-driven keyword research tool that analyzes user queries to identify emerging trends. The website optimizes content based on these insights for improved SEO.
31. To optimize for people, when performing keyword research, pay special attention to user intent keywords. Optimizing keywords can only take you so far. To optimize your content for users, you want to do one more thing: tell stories.
32. "VisibilityMasters.com" targets a mix of industry-specific short-tail keywords and informative long-tail keywords related to their services, ensuring a broad reach across various user search intents.
33. Understanding the importance of keyword research and
34. Understanding search intent is crucial for selecting the most
35. That just about does it for this section. The next few sections will outline how to tweak different aspects of your website to improve ranking. Let us start with an important aspect: Keyword research.
36. At this particular point, using the systematic keyword research process highlighted above, you should have a healthy mix of keywords ready for implementation and optimization on your website. Here is the thing though: although keywords are very important, simply finding the most profitable ones will not guarantee you easy ranking. What will guarantee you easy ranking is how well you optimize those keywords into your content and page.
37. Pay special attention to keyword research because it is an integral part of SEO and use LSI, long tail, and exact match keywords on your web copy and pages. Aim to create amazing, highly sharable, keyword-optimized, helpful content, and Google will love your website. Get your on-page SEO right by optimizing all the relevant areas.
38. How much time you put into keyword research will largely depend on your topic. Highly competitive niches will require more time to dig out gem, low competition, and targeted keywords.
39. In this tutorial, we will guide you through keyword research
40. Section 1: AI-Powered Keyword Research
41. As you can see from the image above, my SERP result page for the keywords ‘keyword research’ has additional data below each result. This is because I have installed the
42. long-tail keywords that include your location and specific services
43. Leverage AI tools for more efficient keyword research and analysis
44. This is a not so nicely named free keyword research tool that produces long tail keyword ideas once you input a keyword phrase. What
45. Once you create your rough draft of keywords, plug them into your spreadsheet. You can use Microsoft Excel, or Google Spreadsheet. The latter is better suited for keyword research because of its cloud nature (meaning you can access your keyword research data from any internet enabled smart device).
46. 2.1 Long-Tail Keyword Research:
47. The debate around which is the best SEO keyword tool is a pepper-hot one, and every marketer is quick to push this or that paid or free keyword research tool and terming it as the best.
48. , etc provide in-depth search data and analysis, if you have a ‘leaky pocket’ and are short on budget, free keyword research tool such as Google Keyword Planner (which we have used numerously) are up to the task.
49. This part is important because, no matter how you look at it, the keyword research process always starts at understanding your niche, which helps you brainstorm a list of possible keyword ideas your target audience uses when searching for information online.
50. Using your massive list of keywords, (you surely must have a massive list of possible keywords by now), and the data from the competitor analyses we performed in step three, it is time to eliminate duplicate keywords phrases, keywords that have too little search volumes, and keywords that are too competitive. To do that, you need a capable keyword research tool.
51. Although we have touched on everything keyword research, and you probably have more keywords than you would care to use, we should mention that since 66% of all SERP clicks go to the top three results, you MUST nail your content keyword research.
52. SEO is all about optimization: without keywords, optimization is impossible. Website and content optimization starts at keyword research. Once you identify the keywords you aim to rank for, to make your website and content relative to those search terms, you have to optimize your content around these keywords.
53. Section 2: The Ultimate Keyword Research Guide for Better Google Ranking
54. After brainstorming and using keyword research tools, analyze

## LINKS
--------------------------------------------------
1. . Implementing external linking strategies:
2. anchor texts to provide meaningful context for readers.
3. Title: "Decoding Backlink Strategies: Quality vs. Quantity"
4. Section 4: Link Building Strategies
5. quality backlinks that may harm your SEO performance and take
6. Link Building in 2016…: The White Hat Guide to Penalty-Free Link Building Google Will Love
7. The optimal approach lies in striking a balance between quality and quantity. While a diverse backlink profile is beneficial, prioritize acquiring links from authoritative and relevant sources. Aim for natural link acquisition through the creation of valuable content that naturally attracts links from reputable websites.
8. iii. Link Building: Building high-quality backlinks from authoritative
9. Backlinks, also known as inbound links, play a crucial role in search engine optimization (SEO). They contribute to a website's authority, trustworthiness, and overall visibility in search engine rankings. Let's delve into the significance of backlinks with an example and website reference:
10. The Role of Backlinks in SEO 36
11. Quality vs. Quantity in Backlink Strategies
12. "TechExplorationHub.com" embeds its tech review videos within relevant blog posts and actively pursues backlinks from tech-related forums, enhancing the overall SEO impact of its video content.
13. link building, social media engagement, influencer marketing, and online
14. This begs the question; what back linking option is available to webmasters, and how can you build penalty-free backlinks guaranteed to help you rank better? Here is how.
15. Mix up anchor texts: When linking externally, vary your text to
16. Internal links are links that point back to a page or piece of content on your website. While their ranking power is debatable, interlinking pages can increase your ranking. Outbound links are links pointing to external sites. If you include links pointing to authoritative sites, Google takes this to mean your aim is to provide users with more information about a subject and uses this as a trust signal.
17. Internal Links, Outbound Links, and Keywords in URL
18. Improved crawling and indexing: Internal links aid search engine
19. There are instances where one domain will link to you several times. While this may positively affect your overall rank, it is generally better to have multiple pages linking back to your site. Each backlink from a single page counts as a vote; thus, more pages linking back to your content=more votes=better rankings.
20. Naturally optimizing your internal links relevant to your keywords can make a huge difference on your ranking. When building internal links, here is the rule: create silo pages, silo pages are pages that connect to categories and supporting posts and pages. Silo pages aggregate your ranking and boost your search performance because after creating silo pages, when you link back to say, your homepage, the linking juice flows through supporting pages and categories.
21. Internal links: These hyperlinks point to another page within the
22. content that naturally attracts both internal and external links.
23. Monitoring your backlink profile is crucial for understanding your
24. direct users to a different website. External links are crucial for
25. While the above strategies will effectively help you create penalty free backlinks, do not neglect other back linking methods such as guest blogging. In fact, guest blogging is an awesome way to create brand authority, and content marketing will get tons of eyeballs on your content (effectively increasing the chances of backlinks, if the content is helpful).
26. Consider 'DigitalCrafters.com,' a digital marketing agency that consistently produces in-depth guides and resources. By creating high-quality and shareable content, they naturally attract backlinks from reputable marketing blogs, enhancing their online authority.
27. Backlinks are the backbone of SEO, but the debate persists: is it better to have numerous backlinks or a few high-quality ones? In this exploration, we unravel the dynamics of quality vs. quantity in backlink strategies, shedding light on the significance of each and the delicate balance for optimal SEO success.
28. Guideline: Monitor your backlink profile. Penguin penalizes websites with spammy or manipulative backlinks. Regularly audit your backlinks, disavow toxic links, and focus on earning high-quality, relevant backlinks. BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers):
29. Building citations and backlinks is crucial for local search rankings.
30. Regularly monitor your backlink profile using tools like Google Search Console. Identify and disavow low-quality or spammy links that could potentially harm your website's reputation.
31. your internal links to fix or remove any broken links.
32. Link building remains a cornerstone of SEO, but its landscape has evolved, emphasizing quality over quantity. This guide unveils best practices for strategic link building, providing insights, an illustrative example, and a reference to a reputable website that has mastered these principles.
33. , guest blogging, content marketing, resource-page link building, etc. were the most commonly preferred ways to build links.
34. Internal and External Linking Strategies
35. Relationship-building: External linking can foster positive
36. In the tug-of-war between quality and quantity, quality emerges as the true champion. While quantity might provide a temporary boost, it's the quality of backlinks that sustains and elevates your website's authority in the eyes of search engines. The path to SEO success lies in a thoughtful and strategic balance.
37. Step 1: Prepare Your Content/Page for Link Building
38. Link building is a foundational aspect of SEO, and adhering to best practices is essential for long-term success. Let's delve into effective link building strategies with an example and reference to a reputable website:
39. a pivotal role in determining your website's authority and visibility. In this guide, we'll uncover the significance of backlinks, their impact on SEO, and showcase a real-world example of their influence.
40. Avoid excessive linking: While internal links are beneficial, avoid
41. 9 ways to create a well-structured internal linking structure that works
42. . Balancing internal and external linking:
43. Neglect silo pages and internal link building at your own peril.
44. In the intricate realm of SEO, backlinks emerge as a formidable force. These links from external websites to your own play
45. Consider the example of 'TechInsights,' a technology news website. As 'TechInsights' consistently produces high-quality and insightful content, reputable technology blogs and news outlets frequently link to their articles. These backlinks not only drive referral traffic but also signal to search engines that 'TechInsights' is an authoritative source in the technology niche.
46. How do you prepare your site for link building?
47. Link Building Best Practices 43
48. As you can see, since 2013, deliberate link building is on a downward trend while other link building adjacent factors such as social shares (these count as natural links, which Google loves).
49. from Backlinko should remind you which on-page SEO elements you should pay attention to. Plus feel free to send us an email with your questions. Visit
50. Relevant context: External links provide readers with additional
51. 'TechInsights' serves as an example of a website benefiting from a strong backlink profile in the technology niche.
52. are some strategies to build citations and backlinks:
53. same website. Internal links are used to establish a hierarchy and
54. Link building is the aspect of getting other pages (preferably quality and relevant sites) to link back to your website content or pages. In the early days of search, link building was a breeze. To rank top on first page of Google SERP, all a webmaster had to do was create a ton of links pointing to a page or piece of content without caring if the linking page was relevant to the linked-back-to website page or piece of content. Enter the Google Penguin algorithm update.
55. The bedrock of effective link building is compelling content. Craft content that is informative, valuable, and shareable. When your content stands out, others are more likely to link to it naturally.
56. Using this strategy to create backlinks involves three steps: perform a backlink analysis on related websites, find the broken link, reach out to the webmaster, and inform him or her about the link rot. Your aim here is to inform the webmaster of the dead link and provide an alternative link, your link.
57. creating internal anchor texts. This can help improve the SEO value of
58. website. Incorporating internal links help readers navigate through
59. Not all websites and pages are equal. Some pages and domains have better rank. It is better for your website ranking if pages with a high PR (better-ranked pages) link back to you. As you build links, aim to have high quality websites link back to you. (we shall delve into link building much later)
60. "VisibilityMasters.com" engages in guest posting on industry-leading blogs and collaborates with influencers to create content. These efforts result in authoritative backlinks that boost the website's visibility.
61. Ahrefs and Moz allow you to track your backlinks and analyze their
62. How to Build Penalty-Free Backlinks Google Loves
63. authority, relevancy, and anchor text. Identify any toxic or low-
64. Acquiring high-quality backlinks from reputable websites to enhance authority.
65. Backlinks serve as signals of trust and authority, influencing search engine rankings.
66. Link building is an art that requires a strategic approach. By focusing on high-quality content creation, personalized outreach, guest posting on authoritative sites, and vigilant link
67. The example content illustrates the impact of backlinks on SEO using the hypothetical example of 'TechInsights.' The reference to the TechInsights website provides a real-world example of a site benefiting from a strong backlink profile. This content aims to emphasize the importance of quality over quantity and suggests effective link-building strategies for SEO success.
68. Imagine this, your website is about acne, and then, a site talking about car repair links back to a page on your website; do you think Google would pay any special relevance to that backlink? NO. Links from pages relative to your subject hold the ranking relevance.
69. Guideline: Focus on building high-quality backlinks. PageRank evaluates the importance of a page based on the quantity and quality of links pointing to it. Prioritize natural link-building strategies and avoid manipulative practices.
70. Internal linking is crucial for SEO, but dead internal links can
71. Build a network of high-quality backlinks from reputable websites in your industry. Guest posting, influencer collaborations, and creating shareable content can contribute to acquiring valuable backlinks.
72. When creating your backlink strategy, remember that creating too many links within a short period may appear spammy. Instead, aim to create natural, high quality backlinks (the keyword here is natural), and pay attention to your social shares and social presence. Put in as much effort in social site content as you do your site content.
73. Contribute guest posts to authoritative websites within your industry. This not only provides exposure to a new audience but also earns you valuable backlinks. Ensure that your guest posts are well-researched and add value to the hosting site's audience.
74. Example Explanation: The example content outlines key link building best practices, including creating high-quality content, outreach to relevant websites, guest posting on authoritative sites, and monitoring and disavowing low-quality links. The reference to 'DigitalCrafters.com' serves as an illustrative example of a website successfully
75. Using internal and external linking strategies
76. Before we close out step one, I want to point out something because after preparing your site for linking, the subsequent steps are the actual steps you need to engage to get tons of quality backlinks.
77. Effective link building involves creating valuable content that naturally attracts links. Outreach to reputable websites, guest posting, and participation in industry forums are strategies to proactively build backlinks. However, always prioritize quality and relevance over quantity.
78. The broken links link-building strategy is perhaps the most neglected, most potent link building strategy.
79. Quantity can be alluring. The idea of having an extensive backlink profile might seem like a shortcut to SEO success. More links can potentially lead to increased visibility and higher rankings, but it's crucial to recognize the nuances of this approach.
80. opportunities. This can help you earn valuable backlinks to your
81. Seek backlinks to your videos from reputable and relevant websites, enhancing the authority of your video content.
82. 5.2 Backlinks from High-Quality Sources:
83. Both internal and external linking strategies are essential for a
84. To create quality backlinks that attract zero penalties and tons of Google cheer without paying a dime, use the following guide:
85. charities and request a backlink to your website. Develop
86. Section 1: The SEO Impact of Backlinks
87. Internal and external linking strategies significantly improve
88. Title: "Mastering Link Building: Best Practices for SEO Success"
89. External links: Also known as outbound links, are hyperlinks that
90. : This one is major. Google uses backlinks as votes of confidence: more domains linking back to your site=better rankings.
91. Acknowledge the appeal of having numerous backlinks for potential visibility and rankings.
92. served to filter sites that used spammy linking to manipulate ranking. In particular, the Penguin update sought to identify sites that bought backlinks, or used link networks to gather ‘votes of confidence’ to manipulate ranking.
93. The variety and types of links pointing back to your site matters a great deal. You should aim to create a variety of links. Thanks to Google Penguin, too many links of a similar type may appear spammy and negatively affect your ranking. For instance, having too many homepage links and no other page links may also appear spammy. One thing you should note is that Google does not advocate for link building. Instead, they advocate for natural back linking that provide value to their customers.
94. . Implementing internal linking strategies:
95. There are two primary types of links: internal links and external
96. Internal and external linking strategies are fundamental to search
97. Remember to use descriptive anchor texts, choose reputable
98. Step 4: Build Online Citations and Backlinks
99. Keywords with a low difficulty rank rate have low authority, or poorly optimized pages or websites on the first page of Google. This makes it easier to, with a backlink strategy in place, de-throne them, and get your page, content, or website on the first page of Google. On the other hand, trying to rank for highly competitive keywords with high quality authority pages on the first page of Google SERP will be an uphill task.
100. Advocate for a balanced approach, prioritizing quality while maintaining a diverse backlink profile.
101. Title: "Unveiling the Power of Backlinks: A Catalyst for SEO Success"
102. Backlinks act as a vote of confidence and trust from one website to another. Search engines view these links as endorsements, considering them as signals of valuable and relevant content. Websites with a robust backlink profile are often rewarded with higher search rankings.
103. Emphasize the importance of high-quality backlinks from authoritative sources.
104. Unfortunately, while looking to build natural links, most webmasters often neglect a very important aspect: preparing your site for link building. Preparing your site for link building is one of the most overlooked off-page optimization aspect.
105. Use descriptive anchor texts: Ensure that the anchor texts you use for
106. As you may have noticed, this guide likes to quote authority figures as a way to place emphasis on what it teaches. Remember Brian Dean, whom we mentioned earlier; here is what he had to say about creating and optimizing internal links:
107. While the number of backlinks is important, their quality matters even more. A few high-quality backlinks from authoritative and relevant websites hold more weight than numerous links from low-quality sources. Focus on building a diverse and natural backlink profile to enhance your website's SEO.
108. Quality backlinks, on the other hand, carry substantial weight. A single link from a reputable and authoritative website can have a more profound impact on your SEO than numerous links from low-quality sources. Quality backlinks are seen as genuine endorsements of your content.
109. Enhanced navigation: Internal links provide a seamless navigation
110. internal links are descriptive and accurately represent the destination
111. number on other websites, while backlinks are links to yours. Here
112. . Benefits of external linking:
113. Backlinks are the backbone of SEO success, elevating your website's authority and trustworthiness in the eyes of search engines. As demonstrated by 'TechInsights,' a well-crafted content strategy coupled with natural link acquisition can propel your website to new heights in the competitive online landscape.
114. By fixing link rots, Google can love, and reward you with better rankings. Using broken links to build quality backlinks is not a new strategy: it is an age old, tested, and proven link-building strategy that shows no sign of fizzling out.
115. and external linking strategies to maximize SEO benefits.
116. Off-page optimization involves activities outside of your website that impact its visibility in search engine results. This includes building backlinks, social signals, and other external factors.
117. Monitor broken links: Regularly check for broken external links
118. Monitor and Disavow Low-Quality Links: Regularly monitor backlinks, identifying and disavowing lowquality or spammy links.
119. For this reason, its only right we start with link building as an important off-page SEO factor before moving on to other off-page elements you should optimize to better your ranking.
120. The example content explores the dynamics of quality vs. quantity in backlink strategies. It acknowledges the allure of quantity, emphasizes the essence of quality, discusses the risks associated with prioritizing quantity over quality, and advocates for striking a thoughtful balance. This content aims to guide SEO practitioners toward a strategic approach that prioritizes the long-term impact of quality backlinks.
121. backlinks, and identify areas where you can improve. This will help
122. Key Points on Quality vs. Quantity in Backlink Strategies:
123. Backlinks are links from other websites pointing to your website.
124. consider the quality and relevance of external links when determining
125. Create backlinks (more on this later)
126. While Google considers deliberate link building unnatural and spammy (thus prone to penalties), Google still pays special attention to links. To see this in metrics, examine the screenshot below courtesy of Neil Patel.
127. Emphasize the profound impact of high-quality backlinks from reputable and authoritative sources.
128. “The number of internal links to a page indicates its importance relative to other pages on the site.”
129. Key Points on Backlinks in SEO:
130. Here is a fun fact about info-graphics: if they are compelling enough, and highly relevant to a subject, other bloggers in your niche will link back to them, which results in an instant, high quality backlink. Other than being great engagement drivers, visually compelling info-graphics earn high quality editorial links from high quality, relevant sites.
131. on-page optimization, and link building will help you optimize
132. Actively reach out to websites within your niche or industry. Build relationships with bloggers, influencers, and businesses. A personalized outreach strategy can result in natural backlinks and collaborations that benefit both parties.
133. - Internal links connect different pages or sections within your
134. . Benefits of internal linking:
135. As we have stated, Off-page SEO is not solely about link building. However, building links is an integral part of it mainly because without links, it is impossible for Google to determine how valuable a piece of content or webpage is.
136. Section 5: Video Embeds and Backlinks
137. keyword rankings, backlinks, and more. These tools often
138. Let’s kick off this section by getting our facts right: while link building is a detrimental factor, and a mainstay of off-page SEO, Off-page SEO does not eat, drink, and breath back linking.
139. In the realm of SEO, the debate between the quality and quantity of backlinks continues to be a focal point. While a large number of backlinks can be tempting, the emphasis on quality is paramount. Let's explore the dynamics of quality vs. quantity in backlink strategies:

## MOBILE
--------------------------------------------------
1. benefits for SEO. Its SEO-friendly structure, responsive themes,
2. website's mobile responsiveness. Search engines like Google
3. Guideline: Ensure mobile responsiveness. Search engines prioritize mobilefriendly websites. Use responsive design, optimize images for mobile devices, and prioritize fast-loading pages for an optimal mobile user experience. Panda Algorithm:
4. "ExperienceOptimized.com" adopts a responsive design that seamlessly adapts to different screen sizes. Intuitive navigation menus guide users to relevant content effortlessly, creating a positive first impression.
5. and responsive design, will provide a strong base for learning
6. friendly websites in its search rankings, so choosing a responsive
7. crucial. A responsive theme adjusts its layout and design to fit different
8. Fortunately, WordPress offers a wide range of responsive themes that
9. devices. Using a responsive theme ensures that your website
10. Fortunately, WordPress offers a wide range of responsive
11. Section 1: Responsive and Intuitive Design
12. Mobile responsive: Most WordPress themes ensure your website
13. meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
14. website, such as site speed, mobile responsiveness, and navigability,
15. Ensure the website is optimized for various devices, particularly mobile devices. A responsive design enhances accessibility and provides a seamless experience across platforms.
16. responsiveness, page loading speed, easy navigation, user-
17. With the increasing use of mobile devices, having a responsive theme is
18. factors such as responsiveness, page load speed, clean code, SEO-
19. responsive theme ensures that your website looks good and functions
20. tools like BrowserStack or Responsive Design Mode in web
21. Encourage satisfied customers to leave positive reviews on your GMB profile. Respond promptly to reviews, whether positive or negative, to demonstrate your commitment to customer satisfaction. Positive reviews build trust, while addressing concerns shows responsiveness and care.
22. Implement responsive design strategies to serve
23. mobile-responsive and has fast loading times.
24. This includes optimizing site speed and mobile responsiveness and
25. Responsive design is a crucial aspect of mobile optimization. It
26. 2. Responsive and Mobile-Friendly Themes:

## AI SEO
--------------------------------------------------
1. df.loc[df.Nationality =='Spain',  'Nationality2'] = 'Spain'
2. Read X-rays and scans: Sometimes AI can spot things in medical images that even doctors might miss.
3. When you run the above code, you will receive the links Learn and Apply and not the actual URLs. This happens since the .text attribute only leaves that portion of the HTML element, which is easy for the compiler to see. The compiler does not look at the HTML tags. It also considers the HTML attributes that have the URLs, which will only leave you with the link text. If you want to obtain the URL, extract the attribute values and keep them without removing them from memory.
4. In short: Google has no objections to AI-generated content as long as it doesn’t violate Google’s basic principles, is useful to
5. Click Ok and shut down all the windows. When you have set it up, you can execute certain Python scripts such as Python script.py. This script is cleaner and can be easily managed.
6. Teem is sitting at the moment on the top of the mountain.
7. # Splitting the dataset into train and test
8. After selecting the news topic, we employed another tool to perform internet research using perplexity.ai to gather as much credible and reliable information about the news as possible.
9. Thank you for purchasing this guide about data science and machine learning with Python. One of the first questions people ask is, what is data science?  This is not a particularly easy question to answer because the term is widespread these days, used just about everywhere. Some say it is nothing more than an unnecessary label, given that science is all about data anyway, while others say it is just a buzzword.
10. Whether you’re just starting out with AI in SEO or you’re looking to refine your existing strategy, this chapter will provide you with a clear set of guidelines to keep in mind. We’ll break down complex ideas into simple, actionable steps that you can apply to your own projects.
11. For instance, when drafting an article or an email, an AI tool might suggest alternative phrases that are more engaging or appropriate for the target audience. This not only saves time but also elevates the quality of the content. In academic writing, AI can help researchers by suggesting relevant sources, checking for plagiarism, and even formatting citations correctly. These tools have become essential in maintaining the high standards expected in professional and educational environments.
12. Machine learning models are fed historical data, known as training data. They learn from that and then build a prediction algorithm that predicts an output for a completely different set of data, known as testing data, that is given as an input to the system. How accurate the models are is entirely dependent on the quality of the data and how much of it is provided – the more quality data there is, the better the results and accuracy are.
13. Step 3: Claim and Optimize Your Google My Business Listing
14. The predicted output is y, the intercept or bias is b0, and the coefficient for x, the input value, is b1. There is a b coefficient associated with each input data column. This coefficient is a constant real value that the model learns from the training data.
15. most email accounts have a spam folder where all your spam emails appear. You might question how your email provider knows which emails are spam, and the answer is machine learning. The process is automated after the algorithm is taught to recognize spam emails.
16. Python for Data Science and Machine Learning
17. While AI enhances efficiency and quality, it also challenges our notions of authorship and authenticity. As we navigate this new landscape, it is imperative to strike a balance that leverages the strengths of both human creativity and machine intelligence, fostering a collaborative future in digital writing.
18. 1.1 Natural Language Processing (NLP):
19. Machine learning experts also need command over certain skills, including:
20. We begin by exploring the current state of AI-generated content
21. In all these areas, generative AI is helping people do things faster, create new and exciting things, and solve problems in ways we’ve never been able to before. It’s an exciting time to
22. So, get ready to embark on an exciting journey into the world of AI-powered SEO. We’ll demystify complex concepts, provide you with actionable insights, and help you unlock the immense potential of AI in boosting your online presence. By the end of this book, you’ll have a clear understanding of how AI is shaping
23. : in the same way as linear regression, your model can end up overfitting if you have too many highly correlated inputs. Think about removing the highly correlated inputs and calculating pairwise correlations.
24. page URL containing your Schema markup or paste the
25. One way to monitor and maintain high quality is by using autonomous content critic agents, as mentioned in previous chapters. These ‘content critics’ ensure the quality of our AI-generated content. If implemented correctly, this should be enough to keep things running smoothly.
26. the code and use comments to explain the purpose of each section.
27. images remain visually appealing while enhancing your
28. Always use lowercase letters in your URLs to maintain
29. Improved crawling and indexing: Internal links aid search engine
30. This is how GANs work. They have two parts that compete with each other, helping both to improve. It’s like a fun game that makes the AI smarter and better at creating things that look real.
31. The training data set that we are using for this example has 32561 rows and 15 columns. Out of these fifteen columns only six columns have integer data, while the other columns have object or character data. You can also check the test data set in a similar manner. The number of rows and columns in the data set can also be identified using the following code:
32. The higher entropy is, the more information it contains.
33. Next, we create the Random Forest Classifier, train it and then test it:
34. Name, Address, and Phone Number (NAP) consistency is crucial for local businesses aiming to establish a strong online presence.
35. call CTAs may be perceived as spammy. Google aims to
36. In the future, the best results will probably come from humans and AI working together.
37. When you do not need a certain piece of information that is stored in the dictionary, you can use the del statement to eliminate it from the key-value pair. The del statement requires the name of the dictionary and its related key. Let’s see how we can use the del statement to remove key-value pairs from the dictionary.
38. n this chapter we’re diving into the exciting world of full automation in SEO using AI. This chapter is all about taking your AI-powered SEO to the next level, exploring how you can automate entire processes to save time and boost efficiency.
39. New data is continuously being generated, and providing machine learning models with the new data helps them upgrade over time, become more accurate, and continuously improve their performance. This leads to continually better decisions being made.
40. Using this line of code, you can save all the header two elements that contain the keyword “Python” and save the information in an accessible variable. You are calling this method directly on the first variable you extract. When you print the output of this function, you will not have anything in the output:
41. The script you have written can scrape the information from the website and filter the HTML elements to obtain the relevant details. What do you think is missing now? The link to apply for the role. While you were working on identifying the elements in the page, you identified there were two links at the bottom using which you can apply to the position. You cannot work with these elements the same way we worked with other elements in the above sections. Consider the script below:
42. It’s also worth preparing a separate agent to monitor anomalies. This means you’ll present it with a “normal” situation using the k-shot method I described, and you’ll show it daily reports from the sentiment-analyzing agent so it can recognize anomalies. Such anomalies, whether an unusual increase in positive or negative sentiment, should be reported to you immediately.
43. Generative AI, especially LLMs, are designed to provide a response each time they are prompted. If the critic isn’t carefully set up to check if the content is correct and to make adjustments only when necessary, it might endlessly make changes. Therefore, this requires careful attention because such automation could not only fail to conclude but also result in substantial costs. This could be a costly mistake, particularly if token limits in the LLM are set relatively high.
44. Data Science vs. Machine Learning
45. Section 1: AI-Powered Keyword Research
46. Collaboration for Enhanced Productivity: AI tools are shown to assist writers by suggesting word choices, stylistic improvements, and even generating paragraphs, enhancing productivity and content quality across various fields, including marketing, academia, and technical writing.
47. This book focuses primarily on Generative AI, so I won’t be delving deeply into other AI models and solutions that can assist with SEO and overall usefulness of our websites.
48. The industry I implemented this chat for was Superyacht Sales and Luxury Yacht Charter. As you might guess, it’s a very demanding and quite specific field, yet the AI chat performed outstandingly well.
49. Think of VAEs like a magic box that can shrink things down and then make them big again. But it’s not just shrinking - it’s learning about the important parts of what it’s shrinking.
50. 4. Google’s Stance on AI-Written Content
51. AI is transforming SEO by enabling more efficient content creation, data analysis, and automation of routine tasks.
52. Analytics Vidhya. “Scikit-Learn in Python - Important Machine Learning Tool.”
53. Experiment and adapt: Don’t be afraid to try new AI tools and techniques. What works best for your specific needs may require some trial and error.
54. The program iterates through key-value pairs in the dictionary. As it runs through each pair, Python keys are forwarded to a variable named ‘feature.’ The values are forwarded and stored in the variable named as ‘desc.’ The information was displayed in a neat and formatted style. Descriptive variables make it easy to write and read the code. For practice, you should change the names of variables and try your own names.
55. feature extraction is one of the most critical factors in machine learning. You will need to know some specialized processing algorithms, such as shearlets, bandlets, curvelets, and contourlets.
56. The document is long. I have just included a few sentences to show you what you will find after running the code in Python editor. Python programmers like the code to be beautiful. It must look elegant. Programmers solve different problems that people face, and they respect efficient, well-designed, and beautiful solutions to different problems. As you start learning more about Python and use it to write more code, the on-looker should praise the beauty of the code.
57. follow a logical progression and maintain a clear hierarchy.
58. What is your favorite tourist destination? Spain
59. maintain a natural link profile. Use descriptive and relevant
60. There are far too many machine learning algorithms to possibly mention them all, but we can talk about the most common ones you are likely to use. Later, we’ll look at how to use some of these algorithms in machine learning examples, but for now, here’s an overview of the most common ones.
61. “When you build a site today, you have to consistently write and publish in-depth content. This content must add value, be interesting to the reader, and solve a definite problem. If you fail to do that, you will not engage readers, and the conversion rate will be low.”
62. Imagine a situation where you’ve implemented full automation. In a well-executed automation of your SEO content, using the methods or tools I described in the previous chapter, content will appear on your website without your intervention. Completely autonomous AI programs will do all the work for you.
63. Creating images for ads: Just like with art, AI can make pictures for advertisements.
64. where all the dataset rows (vectors) are stored – the vectors contain the dependent feature values. In our dataset, the four features are Outlook, Temperature, Windy, and Humidity.
65. clf_entropy.fit(X_train, y_train)
66. During the first iteration of the loop, the variable element contains the first element in the sequence and is available to the indented suite. In the second iteration, the second element of the sequence is considered, and this goes on until the conditional statement is false.
67. After brainstorming and using keyword research tools, analyze
68. The best practice is to step away from your computer for a while. Take a break and try again. Syntax is extremely important in the world of programming, so even if there is a missing colon, mismatched parentheses, or a mismatched quotation mark, it will prevent your program from running properly. You should reread all the parts of the code, look at what you have done, and remove any errors.
69. You can use the web scraper to obtain information from the Internet, but the issue of using this scraper is based on the website being used. This chapter introduces web scraping and helps you understand the entire process of web scraping. You can then apply the process of using this scraper.
70. You can see that the range() function prints only numbers from 1 to 6. This is due to its off-by-one style that you will more often see in many programming languages. The range() function causes Python to initiate counting at the very first value. It stops when it finally reaches the second value that you provide to it. Because it seizes at the second value, the output will never contain the last value. If you want to include the digit 7 in the output, you need to extend the range to 8.
71. The same situation applies or has applied to texts and content generated by AI. Initially, AI-generated content was relatively easy to identify, and many tools were developed for this purpose. OpenAI once released such a tool. However, as
72. I’ll also share my experience here. The company I set up automation for, this time in the luxury watch industry, decided to use AI to automatically generate blog posts on their website and matching teasers for various social media platforms like Instagram, X (formerly Twitter), Facebook, LinkedIn, and Google My Business.
73. You can start with an empty dictionary and fill it up with key-value pairs. You can add as many items to the dictionary as you want. The first step in this regard is to define the dictionary with the help of empty braces. Then you can add key-value pairs on the new lines. See the following example to learn how you can build a dictionary.
74. Prioritize quality: While AI can help create content more efficiently, never compromise on quality. Your ultimate goal should always be to provide value to your audience.
75. # Function to perform training with giniIndex.
76. X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.4, random_state=1)
77. Being able to automate repetitive tasks is one of machine learning's best features. Many businesses worldwide are using it to deal with email and paperwork automation. Take the financial sector, for example. Every day, lots of data-heavy, repetitive tasks need to be performed, and machine learning takes the brunt of this work, automating it to speed it up and freeing up valuable staff hours for more important tasks.
78. Having looked at the different categories of keywords, you may be wondering, “Which types of keywords should I aim to rank for?” The answer to that question is relative to the nature of your website. That said, regardless of the nature of your website, it is best to have a healthy mix of all keywords.
79. What if an AI creates a painting that looks very similar to a famous artist’s work? Is that okay, or is it copying?
80. It’s like having a super-powered paintbrush - it can help you create amazing art, but you’re still the artist making the decisions!
81. This book focuses on SEO, so I won’t delve into other “Text To…” tools here. I will, however, mention that we now have access to tools like “text to speech” (elevenlabs), “text to video” (LumaLabs, OpenAI Sora, RunwayML), “text to music” (suno, udio), “text to vector,” and many others, and this list is constantly growing.
82. """Now I am Simulating the eagle to sit on the top of the mountain."""
83. or even a plain blue link is best.
84. his chapter introduces the concept of Generative AI, an advanced type of artificial intelligence that can create new content such as text, images, music, and videos based on patterns in provided data. Unlike traditional AI, which primarily analyzes and processes data, generative AI can produce entirely new and unique outputs.
85. you can tailor your messaging, tone, and style to resonate with
86. def tarin_using_entropy(X_train, X_test, y_train):
87. Add new posts, pages, or copy details by editing old pages
88. 3. Can AI-Written Text Be Recognized?
89. color = "green", s = 10, label = 'Train data')
90. While generative AI is exciting and powerful, it also faces some big challenges. Let’s explore these challenges and think about what the future might hold for this amazing technology.
91. Design visually appealing thumbnails that accurately represent the video content. A compelling thumbnail can increase click-through rates. 4.2 Organized Playlists:
92. Welcome to the fascinating world of AI and SEO! In this book, we’re going to explore how artificial intelligence is revolutionizing the landscape of search engine optimization. Don’t worry if these terms sound intimidating - we’ll break everything down into easy-to-understand concepts that anyone can grasp, regardless of their technical background.
93. However, Python also offers a solution to this problem. If you are worried about the order of the arguments, you can use keyword arguments. A keyword argument is like a name-value pair that you pass on to a function. You should link the name and the value inside the argument so that there is little confusion left when you pass on the argument.
94. Now you have installed Python and Pip to manage different packages,  you only need one final software package -  virtualnv. It will enable you to create certain isolated local virtual environments for several Python projects.
95. The integration of loops into a dictionary is an easy way to handle a dictionary, especially if the dictionary belongs to a corporate firm where the data is literally in millions of key-value pairs. Looping is the only way to manage large-sized data effectively.
96. This again is the original list.
97. Aim to have static URLs that are human-readable and
98. For a while, it was unclear how Google viewed AI-generated text. There were various guesses and speculations.
99. Content Creation: Generative AI can create text, images, music, and other forms of art. For example, language models like GPT-4 can write articles, compose poetry, or engage in conversations.
100. If it fits into your aim, use case studies to connect with users to drive engagement, and increase user value. Further, because, they are seriously helpful to readers, well-researched, insightful case studies tend to rank high on Google. When creating a case study, follow these guidelines:
101. The simplest dictionary has a single key-value pair. Once a dictionary has been created, you can modify it any time with more information. There is no limit to the maximum stored information in a dictionary.
102. Role of Large Language Models (LLMs): It discusses how LLMs, trained on extensive datasets of human-written texts, generate content that closely mimics human writing, blurring the lines between human and machine authorship.
103. Any key you use in a dictionary should be immutable. This means you would have to use a number, list, tuple, or string. The value of this key can be anything you need. Dictionaries are mutable, which means you can add, remove, and modify key-value pairs. You need to map the keys to objects, which is why dictionaries are referred to as “mappings.” These remind us their behavior is different when compared to sequences.
104. Measured variables are considered as unpivoted to the row axis. This means that, where the measured variables were scattered over the DataFrame's width, melt() will ensure they are placed to its height. So, instead of becoming wider, the DataFrame becomes longer. This results in a pair of non-identifier columns called value and variable. Here's an example to show you what this means:
105. But let’s raise the bar and introduce another mechanism to boost the quality of our automation.
106. Every approach would need to use a different environment. The book contains a lot of information about Python and its functions, and you can use them to improve your knowledge of Python. The book uses simple approaches and tools that make it easier for you to work with Python on different operating systems. You can write your scripts either on the Python Interactive Shell or any text editor.
107. Transactional keywords are exactly that: transactional in nature. Users using these types of keywords as their search queries are looking to make a purchase. Thus, on top of being targeted keywords, these types of keywords are ideal converters, and thus ideal for commercial or affiliate sites. Transactional keywords contain the phrases “buy, for sale, bargain, subscribe’, or any other phrase indicating someone with the intention to buy.
108. The truth is, while paid keyword tools such as
109. Let’s dive in and discover together how AI is transforming the way we approach SEO, and how you can use these cutting-edge technologies to your advantage in the ever-evolving digital landscape.
110. for misuse and the importance of transparency and accountability to maintain trust in digital communication.
111. We’ll start by breaking down the different categories of AI tools for SEO, from simple text generators to complex, all-in-one platforms. You’ll learn about the strengths and potential
112. Both have a huge amount of use cases, but they do have limits. Data science may be strong, but, like anything, it is only effective if the proper training and best-quality data are used.
113. Writing for people is the most important part of writing SEO copies. When you create copies, you should have an aim, and intention. Do you want to drive engagement? Do you want to convert? Words are powerful. How you use them on your copy will determine how well your copy achieves its goal.
114. Imagine you have two robot friends: one is an artist, and the other is an art critic. The artist robot tries to create paintings that look real, while the critic robot tries to spot which paintings are fake. As they keep practicing, both robots get better at their jobs. The artist learns to make more realistic paintings, and the critic becomes better at spotting fakes.
115. Welcome to the exciting world of practical sentiment analysis using generative AI! In this section, we’ll dive into the nitty-gritty of how to actually use AI to understand the emotions and opinions hidden in text.
116. 1.3.5 Natural Language Processing (NLP)
117. To fully automate the process, you would need to use tools that can generate the aforementioned list and conduct internet research on your behalf. While there are many tools that generate texts based on a list of topics, such as ContentGT, Copy.ai, or Jasper.ai, and they provide the necessary APIs for automation, it’s challenging to find a solution that does all
118. Not all websites and pages are equal. Some pages and domains have better rank. It is better for your website ranking if pages with a high PR (better-ranked pages) link back to you. As you build links, aim to have high quality websites link back to you. (we shall delve into link building much later)
119. The information provided herein is stated to be truthful and consistent, in that any liability, in terms of inattention or otherwise, by any usage or abuse of any policies, processes, or directions contained within is the solitary and utter responsibility of the recipient reader. Under no circumstances will any legal responsibility or blame be held against the publisher for any reparation, damages, or monetary loss due to the information herein, either directly or indirectly.
120. cc option, users can delegate the entire process of organizing meetings—from scheduling events to automated follow-ups. Clara personalizes interactions with a custom email signature and job title, managing meeting logistics in natural language. This reduces manual coordination efforts significantly. With features like automatic reminders and priority notifications, Clara enhances meeting management efficiency, making it indispensable for streamlined organization.
121. : it may happen that the likelihood estimation learning the coefficients doesn't converge. This could be because of too many highly correlated inputs in the data or sparse data, which means the input data contains many zeros.
122. X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = model_selection.train_test_split(X, y, test_size=test_size, random_state=seed)
123. The output is quite straightforward as the code is a simple for loop. Suppose a person is shopping at the grocery app, and the store runs out of lettuce. What happens next? If you add an if statement inside the for loop, it can handle this typical situation very well.
124. The chat we chose was AI Yacht Chat from Yachting.ai
125. Machine Learning Past to Present
126. Sim is sitting at the moment on the top of the mountain.
127. That said, slicing logic is the same – you won’t get the end index in the output.
128. "TechExplorationHub.com" accompanies its gadget review video with a detailed description covering features, specifications, and user experiences, enhancing the video's search visibility.
129. Specific Site Location: This location will have the HTML information that has the details of the unique resource of the job description
130. Practical Applications: Generative AI is used in various fields such as marketing content creation, automatic code generation, graphic design, music composition, and even in medicine, where it can assist in developing new drugs.
131. transforms note-taking with automated transcription and summarization of virtual meetings across multiple platforms, supporting over 69 languages. Featuring AI-driven search capabilities to sift through keywords and key discussions, along with options for annotation, sharing, and seamless integration with popular third-party apps, it becomes an invaluable tool for capturing and utilizing meeting insights efficiently.
132. be in vain. Let’s explore how to fix!
133. seem overwhelming. Aim to keep paragraphs concise and focused.
134. this is the unseen data, a subset of the primary dataset used to tell us how the model may perform in the future. If you find the model fitting the training set better than it does the test set, you probably have a case of overfitting on your hands.
135. If you want to significantly improve the quality of your chat, look for a solution tailored to your industry. For instance, if you’re in the automotive industry, look for a solution specifically for that industry. If it’s real estate, seek something dedicated to that field. Do not settle for generic solutions.
136. Let's not waste any more time and dive into our introduction to data science and machine learning.
137. Tuples are immutable, and the elements in these are little sealed packets of information. A tuple is specified as a comma-separated list of values, which may be enclosed in parentheses. In certain situations, you may need to use the parentheses. So, if you are unsure of what to do, use the parentheses. The values need not all be of the same type. You can also declare a value as a tuple.
138. For example, there’s an AI called DALL-E that can draw anything you describe to it. People have used it to create funny, beautiful, and sometimes weird art that no one has ever seen before!
139. Throughout the chapter, you’ll find real-world examples and case studies of businesses that have successfully integrated AI into their SEO strategies. These stories will provide valuable insights and inspiration for your own AI journey.
140. To start with WordPress, you will need a domain name and web
141. As the name suggests, site wide optimization details paying attention to site wide SEO factors that may affect ranking. Site-wide SEO is a bit technical mainly because it focuses on eliminating any hindrances Google and users may encounter when navigating your site. It does so by focusing on, and fixing issues such as; structural coding issues, usability, reducing bounce rates (through creating compelling content), fixing indexing issues, and a wide range of issues we shall look at shortly.
142. content, and gather feedback from your existing audience to gain
143. The np.ones() method is used to create an array containing 1s:
144. Python also uses an alternative string splitting method called the string.partition(sep). This method will return a tuple: (head, sep, tail). Using this method, the compiler will search for the separator within the string, and it will return the part before the separator. If it cannot find the separator, the method will return the original string and two empty strings.
145. demographics, interests, needs, and pain points. This
146. The simplicity, accessibility, and low cost of creating content with Generative AI have led many companies and marketing agencies to adopt it on a large scale.
147. Help make movies: Some movies use AI to create special effects or even to help write scripts.
148. In the last section, you brainstormed a possible list of keywords, went though the motion of determining their competiveness and deciding if you can possibly rank for them and if they are worth the effort.
149. In those days, scientists started creating the first “computer brains,” which we call neural networks. Imagine these networks are like spider webs made of tiny computers that learn to solve problems together.
150. Here is the detail of the key feature of your player: Gps.
151. It’s like having a super-smart friend who always knows the answer, but can’t explain how they figured it out.
152. This book is aimed at those with experience of programming in Python, designed to help them further their skills and learn how to use their chosen programming language to go much further than before. It is not aimed at those with no experience of Python or programming, and I will not be giving you a primer on the language.
153. well-rounded SEO approach. Aim to strike a balance between the
154. Example: Compared to paid advertising, organic traffic generated through SEO is a cost-effective way to attract visitors.
155. constantly evolving. To maintain optimal performance,
156. Once again, have a look at the example below"
157. a popular ML package containing many algorithms, and we'll be using some popular modules, such as train_test_split, accuracy_score, and DecisionTreeClassifier.
158. Understanding what Generative AI is, how it shapes content, and how it parallels—or doesn’t—with human-generated content, coupled with Google’s official stance on the matter, raises a crucial question: “How can I leverage Generative AI to my advantage?”
159. This chapter will walk you through Python lists. I will explain what lists are and how you can start working with different elements in the list. Python lists allow you to store different sets of information in a centralized place, whether you have one item or one million to deal with. Lists are considered as one of Python’s most robust features. They have the power to tie together several important concepts into programming.
160. An In-Depth Guide to Machine Learning
161. Humans can provide creativity, emotional understanding, and ethical judgment that AI might struggle with.
162. 'Cleaning', 'Entertainment', 'Entertainment', 'Tech',
163. Dictionaries are considered dynamic structures. You can add many new key-value pairs to a specific dictionary at a given time. For example, you can add key-value pairs to the dictionary. In the following example, I will add new items to the dictionary and see how they are added and how they work.
164. Section 1: Claim and Verify Your Business
165. For this, it’s advisable to set up a new email account, where we can subscribe to a few selected newsletters that cover topics relevant to our industry.
166. Generative AI is a type of technology that can create new things, just like humans can. It might be text, images, sounds, or even
167. In conclusion, the fusion of human and AI in text creation marks a transformative shift in how we write and communicate.
168. train.occupation.fillna('Prof-specialty',inplace=True)
169. # split X and y into training and testing sets
170. The output will be a list of errors for k = 1 right through to k = 50. The least error is for k = 3, justifying why k = 3 was used when the model was being trained.
171. Understanding emotions in text: AI can read reviews, social media posts, or emails and figure out if the person writing is feeling positive, negative, or neutral. Imagine having a magic pair of glasses that could show you the emotions behind every text message!
172. The indented lines make up the body of the function. The line that contains the print statement is the real line of code in the entire structure. When you want Python to execute the code, you simply write a function call by writing the function's name and adding to it the parentheses.
173. videos. It’s a bit like having a very smart robot that can paint, write stories, or compose music!
174. Get ready to discover how you can ride the wave of the AI revolution to improve your search engine rankings and boost your online visibility!
175. The goal of this looped process is to ensure that the resulting text doesn’t contain any nonsense and is appropriate to the content and tone we’ve chosen.
176. Before we explain this statement, let us start by understanding Off-page SEO despite having briefly touched on it.
177. Instead of filling up a dictionary into a list, it is sometimes highly useful to put the list into a dictionary. For example, we can use this feature to describe something. If we have to use a list, we can add details of an object to the list. With the help of a dictionary, a list of features of a house may just be an aspect of a house or something you have been describing.
178. Ethical considerations and copyright issues are crucial when using AI for content creation.
179. Implementing Machine Learning Algorithms with Python
180. expression will only fail when both tests fail. Let us use the
181. One famous transformer model is called GPT (which stands for Generative Pre-trained Transformer). It’s so good at writing that sometimes it’s hard to tell if a human or the AI wrote something!
182. Until now, we have not run the function block of code. This block has only been assigned to the function. To get the code to run, you need to call the function from the main body of the program. This is termed the function call, and it is easy to call functions anywhere in your code using the name you have assigned to the function.
183. In the case of webchat, it’s beneficial to seek a solution tailored specifically to our industry. Overly generic solutions might result in a chat that provides not very useful information to users, thus deterring them from using it.
184. DCNs are like the eyes of AI. They’re really good at looking at pictures and understanding what’s in them. Imagine you could look at a thousand pictures in a second and remember every detail - that’s what DCNs can do!
185. A dictionary is synonymous with address books. When you pick up an address book and look for a person’s name, you will get all that person's details. A dictionary is called a key, and any corresponding detail is referred to as the value.
186. AI is changing how companies tell people about their products:
187. Remember, the goal of SEO remains the same: to connect valuable content with the people who are searching for it. AI is a powerful tool to help achieve this goal more effectively and efficiently than ever before.
188. Regardless of the reason, it’s worth protecting yourself against such problems and damage to your company’s or personal image.
189. Next, we break down Google’s E-E-A-T guidelines (Experience, Expertise, Authoritativeness, and Trustworthiness) and how they apply to AI-generated content. You’ll learn how to ensure your AI-created content aligns with these important quality markers that Google uses to evaluate web pages.
190. There is a lot of data and information available on the Internet, and most people, especially businesses, want to use this information to their benefit. If you want to use the information in the right way, you need to learn how to scrape data from the Internet. Python has many libraries and tools that can be used to perform this job. This chapter has all the information you need about Python and HTML. We will look at the following:
191. Advocate for a balanced approach, prioritizing quality while maintaining a diverse backlink profile.
192. Guideline: Prioritize user experience. RankBrain uses machine learning to understand context and deliver more relevant results. Focus on creating userfriendly content, improving page load times, and enhancing overall website usability.
193. Section 2: Long-Tail Keywords and Conversational Content
194. customer feedback, a researcher studying public opinion, or just someone curious about AI, this chapter will give you practical skills to start using generative AI for sentiment analysis.
195. Let’s say we have a dataset containing p independent variables or features and one dependent variable or response. The dataset has n rows (observations).
196. 428Private338409Bachelors13Married-civ-spouseProf-specialtyWifeBlackFemale0040Cuba<=50K Let us verify if the data set has any missing values. nans = train.shape[0] - train.dropna().shape[0]
197. Summarizing text: AI can read long articles and write short summaries, like having a super-fast reader who can tell you the main points of any book in seconds.
198. The element <div> is a part of the card-content class, which contains the information you want to extract from the website. This element is the third-level parent in the second header section you found based on the filter being used in the code. Now that you have this information, you can use the python_jobs elements and fetch or obtain the information of the parent or grandparent elements to obtain the information you need.
199. # When a number is divided by 2 and the remainder is 0, the number is even.
200. print(veg_item.title() + " is not available at the store right now.")
201. Machine learning and data science are trending high these days and, although many people use the terms interchangeably, they are different. So, let's break this down and learn what we need to know to continue with the rest of the book.
202. foundation to drive successful SEO campaigns.
203. Google’s Stance on AI-Written Content
204. ‘I said to my father, “You will fail if you start losing friends.”’
205. It is important to understand the meaning of the scope of a function. Never use the same name in the main program to name any function you write. This is the basic understanding of scope.
206. we don't need to collect the required data manually because someone has already done it for us. All we need to do is import that dataset. It's worth noting that not all available datasets are free, but the ones we are using are.
207. If you refer back to question five, you will see we already used a stacking example. When a DataFrame is stacked, it is made taller. The innermost column index is moved to become the innermost row index, thus returning a DataFrame with an index containing a new innermost row labels level.
208. One of the key advantages of using WordPress is the availability of
209. It is pertinent to note that the new key-value pairs may not match the order in which you add them. Python is not concerned about the order of the key-value pairs. The only thing it cares about is the connection that each key has with its value.
210. 1.4.5 The Future of Generative AI
211. Let us assume you have a file named mod.py. This file contains the following information:
212. AI learns from data, and sometimes that data can contain human biases.
213. is a statement you can use to bind any exception to the next parameter which you have specified in the code. This is the only way you can make the exception available for the compiler to inspect. It is for this reason the compiler does not catch the IndexError exception. The exception ends since the parameter is bound to IndexError.
214. #returns specific rows and columns using lists containing columns or row indexes
215. These days, machine learning has more attention than you would think possible. One of its primary uses is to automate tasks that require human intelligence to perform. Machines can only replicate this intelligence via machine learning.
216. We can also use Seaborn to generate scatter plots in a straightforward way, so let's recreate our earlier one:
217. The most important thing to remember is that AI is a tool to help humans, not replace them.
218. Leverage AI-powered tools utilizing NLP to understand user intent behind search queries. This ensures the selection of relevant and high-performing keywords.
219. Learning from Data: Generative AI is trained on vast datasets, enabling it to recognize patterns and structures
220. WordPress originated as a blogging platform and has retained its
221. As I mentioned in the chapter about Google’s stance on AI-generated content, it’s crucial to ensure that the content is:
222. Proper implementation of AI in SEO requires a balance between automation and human oversight to ensure quality and originality.
223. Scientists are working on making AI that can explain its thinking, kind of like a student showing their work in a math problem.
224. Pie charts are an excellent way of visualizing proportions in the data. Using our FIFA19 dataset, we could visualize the player proportions for three countries – England, Germany, and Spain – using a pie chart.
225. clf_entropy = tarin_using_entropy(X_train, X_test, y_train)
226. s we reach the end of our journey through the world of AI and SEO, it’s clear that we’re standing at the threshold of a new era in digital marketing. The integration of artificial intelligence into search engine optimization is not just a passing
227. If your site has many dynamic pages, especially ones that contain duplicate content, consider converting your content into static pages. Additionally, if your homepage content constantly changes, consider using a static homepage, and then using this page to point to other locations on your site. This is especially useful considering that an index page with content that changes constantly has a negative SEO effect.
228. is an advanced AI virtual assistant tailored for seamless meeting scheduling. By adding Clara to email threads via the
229. Support vector machines or SVMs are grouped under the supervised learning algorithms used to analyze the data used in regression and classification analysis. The SVM is classed as a discriminative classifier, defined formally by a separating hyperplane. In simple terms, with labeled training data, the supervised learning part, the output will be an optimal hyperplace that takes new examples and categorizes them.
230. 4. Maintain optimal length: Keep your meta descriptions
231. is an all-in-one AI platform that combines multiple AI models and tools, including ChatGPT, Claude AI, Google Gemini, and various image generation capabilities, into a single user-friendly interface. It offers features like custom personas, saved prompts, and workspace organization to enhance productivity for content creation, marketing, and various business tasks, all while providing flexible pricing plans to suit different user needs.
232. I started the code with an empty list known as square_num. Then I told Python to initiate a loop through each value between 1 and 22 using the range function. The present value is raised to the second power in the loop and stored inside the variable square. When the loop completes its run, the list of squares comes out as printed.
233. these are concerned with Natural Language Processing, and their job is to ensure machines can interpret natural languages. They design and engineer software and computers to learn human speech habits and convert the spoken word into different languages. Their aim is to get computers to understand human languages the same way we do, and two of the best examples are apps called DuoLingo and Grammarly.
234. Machine learning offers plenty of features, with the most prominent being the following:
235. Imagine an AI writes a beautiful song. Who should get credit for it? The person who made the AI, the company that owns it, or should the AI itself get credit?
236. we could implement because the store had its own product feed, which was continuously developed, regularly featuring new watches and jewelry. Based on this data, the AI SEO Team daily seeks relevant content from the product feed, such as sales but also new and interesting watches and other precious items, to create a tailored and keyword-enriched blog post. This blog post is then linked in the aforementioned social media.
237. The authority of a domain linking back to your site is a ranking factor; links from authority sites will boost your rankings.
238. The first step is to download the official Python installer. An alternative version is to use an Itanium or AMD machine that is available at
239. If you add the lines of code, you can create any new object in the Beautiful Soup library, where you can store the content of the page. This is the information you need to scrape from the website. Avoid using the page.text object to ensure you do not have any trouble with the output. “html.parser,” which is the second argument you should use to obtain the appropriate information.
240. types, such as the "email" type for email addresses or the "tel"
241. Step 1: Create a Spreadsheet and Brainstorm For Keyword Ideas
242. In 1957, Frank Rosenblatt designed the perceptron, a neural network for computers that simulates human brain thought processes. Ten years later, an algorithm was created called “Nearest Neighbor.” This algorithm allowed computers to begin using pattern recognition, albeit very basic at the time. This was ideal for salesmen to map routes, ensuring all their visits could be completed within the shortest time.
243. If you cannot build a stable script, do not use it. Most websites are continuously developing, and when the website structure changes, you need to find a way to navigate through the sitemap the right way. This is how you obtain the required information. The advantage is that every website is built differently, and the changes are incremental and small. You only need to update the scraper with the information needed by making small adjustments.
244. With the support of NIST, Guido could run several workshops and would participate in different conferences. He managed to spread Python and attract certain key contributors that would play an important role in shaping the future of this new programming language.
245. 7.3 Practical Sentiment Analysis with Generative AI
246. As we have stated, Off-page SEO is not solely about link building. However, building links is an integral part of it mainly because without links, it is impossible for Google to determine how valuable a piece of content or webpage is.
247. Neural networks are taught to identify things, for example, images, and they do this by being trained on massive amounts of labeled data in a process known as supervised learning. No matter how large or small, any change to the assignment requires a new collection of data, which also needs to be prepared. It's fair to say that a neural network cannot truly operate at a human intelligence level because of the brute force needed to get it there – that will change in the future.
248. The SVMs intuition is optimizing linear discriminant models representing the distance between the datasets, which is a perpendicular distance. Let's use our training data to train the model. Before we do that, the cancer datasets need to be imported as a CSV file, and we will train two of all the features:
249. X, Y, X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = splitdataset(data)
250. With machine learning, huge amounts of data can be reviewed, looking for trends and patterns the human eye wouldn't see. For example, Flipkart, Amazon, and other e-commerce websites use machine learning to help understand how their customers browse and what they buy to send them relevant deals, product details, and reminders. The machine learning results are used to show relevant ads to each customer based on their browsing and purchasing history.
251. print("Your answer is incorrect. Please try to run the code again.")
252. The holdout technique is useful because it is simple, flexible, and fast. However, it does come with an association to high variance. This is because the differences between the training and set datasets can provide significant differences in terms of the accuracy estimation.
253. support. Regular updates ensure that your theme remains secure
254. #fitting our model to train and test
255. In the Digital marketing sector for Digital platform, the Search Engine Optimization (SEO) is the strategic process of refining online content and websites to enhance their visibility on search engine results pages (SERPs). The primary objective is to boost organic (unpaid) traffic to a website by improving its perceived relevance and credibility in the eyes of search engines.
256. - Yelp: Coastal Coffee Haven, 123 Main St, Suite 101, Seaside Town, (555)
257. This is a measure of a random variable's uncertainty, characterizing impurity in an arbitrary example collection.
258. Most people access certain URLs and read the news or any article that pops up on those screens. Using the script below, you can open browsers on your laptop easily without having to key in the URLs in your browser. You can save a script with the list of your favorite URLs:
259. No doubt you have heard of linear regression, as it is one of the most popular machine learning algorithms. It is a statistical method used to model relationships between one dependent variable and a specified set of independent variables. For this section, the dependent variable is referred to as response and the independent variables as features.
260. When you provide an SVM algorithm with training examples, each one labeled as belonging to one of the two categories, it will build a model that will assign newly provided examples to one of the categories. This makes it a 'non-probabilistic binary linear classification.'
261. Single words or short phrases that encapsulate the main topic of
262. We begin by addressing a question that may be on your mind: “Do I really need to use AI in SEO?” We’ll examine
263. However, when we want to fully automate and use this tool on an almost mass scale, it won’t be enough for us to have just some cases where it works correctly. We’ll want to aim for most, if not all, cases to be correctly recognized. That’s exactly what the k-shot method is for. It significantly improves the quality of results and model performance.
264. When machine learning characteristics are merged with data analytics, particularly big data, companies find it easier to find solutions to issues and use them to grow their business and increase their profit. Pretty much every industry uses this type of machine learning to increase operations.
265. This introduction sets the stage for a detailed discussion on prompt engineering, k-shot and zero-shot learning, and providing examples in the context of sentiment analysis. You can now proceed to write the detailed content for each of these topics within this section.
266. I will continue the example of the grocery app in this section as well. I have already explained the conditional test so let navigate around to see if you can check for any special values inside the list and handle the values appropriately.
267. retains users and improves your SEO ranking.
268. As we move forward, it’s important for everyone to learn about AI, understand its capabilities and limitations, and think about how we want to use this powerful technology. The future of generative AI is not just up to scientists and engineers - it’s up to all of us to decide how we want to shape this exciting new world!
269. The core of the automation is n8n, which fetches the list of news from the RSS feed at a set time each day. We then pass this list to GPT-4 to identify the most valuable news for us (we prepared specific prompts to let AI decide what should be published that day). It’s crucial to emphasize that this part must be executed very carefully and thoroughly tested. We certainly
270. I, The author, disclaim any liability or responsibility for any
271. The optimal approach lies in striking a balance between quality and quantity. While a diverse backlink profile is beneficial, prioritize acquiring links from authoritative and relevant sources. Aim for natural link acquisition through the creation of valuable content that naturally attracts links from reputable websites.
272. Machine learning falls into three primary categories:
273. # Training the model on the training dataset
274. As is everything SEO, the debate on the ideal content length is a hot one. Nevertheless, while online marketing experts agree there are no hard rules, the info graphic below, courtesy of serpIQ details ranking in relevance to content length.
275. subheadings wherever appropriate. Use <h2> tags for the main
276. "TravelVoiceGuides.com" identifies long-tail voice search keywords like "What are the must-visit places in Europe?" and tailors content to provide comprehensive answers to such queries.
277. if (curtain width > roll width) and (curtain length > roll width):
278. As user-friendly voice-activated devices like smart speakers become more prevalent, optimizing content for conversational queries (e.g., "What are the best digital cameras right now?") is crucial for maintaining SEO relevance.
279. A very nice set of AI-based SEO tools dedicated to WordPress. It’s a great collection for all less advanced
280. Mutuvi, Steve. “Introduction to Machine Learning Model Evaluation.”
281. This book on Python’s basics contains proven steps and strategies on how to be master the basics of Python programming. I recommend that you keep your laptop open in front of you while reading this book. This book is more practical than theoretical. It will challenge you to try coding yourself. It is easy enough for any beginner to start coding right away.
282. Bear in mind the Internet is dynamic, and the website changes every day. Any scraper you build wil require maintenance. Use continuous integration, set up and run the tests to ensure the script you use does not stop working when you run the script.
283. AI could help solve big problems like climate change by coming up with new ideas that humans haven’t thought of.
284. Like data science, machine learning also has its limitations, and these are some of the biggest ones:
285. x_train, x_test, y_train, y_test =train_test_split(X,Y, test_size = 0.30, random_state =54)
286. How Does Machine Learning Work?
287. predicts future values. Historical data is used to train the model, and the prediction would be the future value of a property, for example.
288. In education, AI could create personalized lessons for each student, helping everyone learn in the way that’s best for them.
289. The second half of the for statement includes the names of a dictionary. This will return the list of all the key-value pairs. I have created two variables, namely key and value, to store the information about the keys and values of the dictionary. You can create other variable names as suit you.
290. There are instances where one domain will link to you several times. While this may positively affect your overall rank, it is generally better to have multiple pages linking back to your site. Each backlink from a single page counts as a vote; thus, more pages linking back to your content=more votes=better rankings.
291. X_train,X_test,y_train,y_test=train_test_split(X,y,test_size=0.25,random_state=0)
292. clf_gini = train_using_gini(X_train, X_test, y_train)
293. is an AI-powered platform that generates high-converting ad creatives, helping advertisers boost their conversion rates by up to 14x. It offers features like AI-generated images, headlines, and competitor insights, making it a comprehensive tool for businesses of all sizes to create data-driven, results-focused advertising content quickly and efficiently.
294. According to SEO Moz, if possible, and if it does not compromise user friendliness, aim to place your keywords first in each of these tags but especially the title tag. Doing this will give your website a ranking boost and a higher CTR (click through rate) because users are more likely to click on search result links that start with a keyword if the resulting search is highly relevant to their query.
295. Ethical Implications: It addresses the ethical concerns associated with AI-generated content, such as the potential
296. Evaluating a Machine Learning Model
297. 7.3.1 How to Adapt Generative AI for Sentiment Detection
298. The short way of explaining how a confusion matrix should be interpreted is this:
299. 1.1 The History of Generative AI
300. “The machine does not isolate man from the great problems of nature but plunges him more deeply into them.” - Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
301. You should use your training data to estimate the logistic regression algorithm's coefficients (Beta values b). This is done with the maximum-likelihood estimation. This is one of the more common learning algorithms that many other algorithms use, but it is worth noting that it makes assumptions about your data distribution.
302. This is where Generative AI can come to our rescue. Fortunately, there are methods to use it for sentiment analysis. We can easily leverage this to collect all new comments from our social media channels daily and filter them through our generative AI to weed out those with negative sentiment. These comments can be compiled into daily reports, allowing us to take appropriate action.
303. The np.random.rand() method is commonly used to create ndarray’s with a given shape containing random values from [0,1):
304. The random forest classifier is another supervised machine learning algorithm that can be used for regression, classification, and other decision tree tasks. The random forest creates sets of decision trees from random training data subsets. It then makes its decision using votes from the trees.
305. Lists are useful to store different sets of items that change throughout a program. Their tendency to modify is highly important, especially when working with a certain list of users on a particular website or different characters inside a game. However, sometimes you may feel the desire to create a list that must not be changed. Tuples allow programmers to do exactly that. Python refers to different values that cannot be changed as immutable values. An immutable list is named a tuple.
306. materials, from emails and ads to blog posts and sales listings. Its unique selling point is the ability to mirror a brand’s distinctive style, making it valuable for efficiently crafting brand-consistent content.
307. You can also employ other, lesser-known back linking strategies such as creating a job board, launching a meet up campaign, etc. On a post shared more than 1,572 times on various social platforms (Facebook=766, Twitter=604, LinkedIn=202), Neil Patel outlines
308. pd.crosstab(train.education, train.target,margins=True)/train.shape[0]
309. In this chapter, we’ll discuss common mistakes and issues that can arise when implementing AI in your SEO strategy. We’ll
310. Logistic regression is another machine learning technique from the field of statistics and is the go-to for solving binary classification, where there are two class values. It is named after the function at the very center of the method, known as the logistic function.
311. This history shows us how generative AI has grown from simple ideas to powerful tools that can create all sorts of things. It’s exciting to think about what it might be able to do in the future!
312. While Jasper was once at the forefront of AI-assisted copywriting, the recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have somewhat diminished its edge. However, it can still be a helpful tool for marketers who don’t want to spend too much time fine-tuning their own prompts. In situations where quick, on-brand content is needed, Jasper continues to offer a streamlined solution that can save time and effort.
313. print ("The train data has",train.shape)
314. train['native.country'].value_counts(sort=True)
315. Artificial Neural Networks Machine Learning Algorithm
316. Local search ranking factors play a crucial role in determining the visibility of businesses in local search engine results. Understanding and optimizing for these factors is essential for businesses aiming to attract local customers. Let's delve into key
317. ('The train data has', (32561, 15))
318. So, we could say that machine learning is a study in making machines exhibit human behavior in terms of decision making and behavior by allowing them to learn with little human intervention – which means no explicit programming. This begs the question, how does a machine gain experience, and where does it learn from? The answer to that is simple – data, the fuel that powers machine learning. Without it, there is no machine learning.
319. Drawing from my experience, at a company where I worked, we implemented an AI-based webchat, replacing live human operators. We had some concerns about how it would pan out, but it turned out to be a tremendous success.
320. === RESTART: C:/Users/saifia computers/Desktop/python.py ==
321. - Address: 123 Main Street, Suite 101, Seaside Town
322. I hope this book was able to help you to understand how to work your own SEO in 2016.  The next step is to simply implement what you have learned. Again, feel free to email us with your questions. Simply visit
323. Additionally, we’ll peek into the future of AI in SEO, discussing emerging trends and best practices that will help you stay ahead of the curve. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a clear understanding of the potential challenges and how to navigate them effectively.
324. In conclusion, I encourage ongoing monitoring and staying informed, as the fields of Generative AI and SEO are incredibly fast-changing.
325. Generative AI isn’t just something scientists talk about in labs. It’s being used in many exciting ways in the real world. Let’s explore some of these applications!
326. You can obtain the summary of the statistics of only the integer and double variables using the describe() method. If you want to obtain all the information available about the data set, you should use the function named info().
327. The above example is a 2 x 4 matrix. A matrix is a rectangular array containing numbers. Its shape is N x M – N indicates how many rows there are, and M indicates how many columns there are.
328. As AI technology evolves, so too must the strategies for its implementation. Staying updated with the latest advancements and regulatory changes is crucial. Businesses should invest in training for their teams not only on how to use these tools effectively but also on understanding their limitations.
329. Consider a retail business leveraging effective SEO strategies. This could result in the business securing a prominent position on the first page of search results when potential customers search for products relevant to its offerings. The heightened visibility translates to increased clicks and a greater potential for conversions.
330. Another challenge is that we don’t always know how AI makes its decisions.
331. This method is extremely powerful because you can build a list of vegetables and then check if a certain value exists in the list while you match items.
332. Nothing in life is certain, but in this case, we have real data. Based on my experience with several companies where I’ve helped implement various technologies, I’ve observed firsthand how this actually works.
333. Over the last few decades, Python has emerged as the best and most popular tool for analyzing and visualizing data, among other scientific tasks. When Python was first designed, it certainly wasn't with data science in mind. Instead, its use in these areas has come from the addition of third-party packages, including:
334. These days, we see plenty of evidence of machine learning in action, such as Natural Language Processing and self-drive vehicles, to name but two. Machine learning has been in existence for more than 70 years, though, all beginning in 1943. Warren McCulloch, a neuropsychologist, and Water Pitts, a mathematician,  produced a paper about neurons and the way they work. They went on to create a model with an electrical circuit, producing the first-ever neural network.
335. You will be using empty dictionaries when you start working with the datasets that must be supplied and filled up by the data provided by users, or when you start writing the code that will generate a great number of key-value pairs automatically.
336. support system. This means numerous resources are available
337. If the conditional test had passed, the first block of code would be executed. Now that the first conditional test has failed, the second one has been executed. The test returns a false value, so the second block of code is executed. As the requisite age is less than 18, the test fails, and you see the second line of statements.
338. Let’s say we have a highly complex issue that requires predictions.  Rather than writing complex code, we could give the data to machine learning algorithms.  These develop logic and provide predictions, and we’ll be discussing the different types of algorithms shortly.
339. A pair of ndarrays must be compatible to broadcast together. This compatibility happens when:
340. Second, data science makes it possible for a product to tell its story in an entertaining and compelling way, one of the main reasons why data science is so popular. Businesses and brands can use the information gained from data science to communicate what they want their customers to know, ensuring much stronger relationships between them.
341. df.loc[~df.Nationality.isin(['England', 'German', 'Spain']),  'Nationality2'] = 'Other'
342. The first thing to do is to define the function, where you need to select the parameter. This parameter will be an element present in the dataset. The compiler then performs a check within the function to determine whether the element contains a “(“ or “[“ or not. The values are mapped to specific function elements based on the check’s value. The applymap() function will then be called on the object. Now, if you run the following lines of code, you will see the output will be very neat.
343. programming knowledge. This tutorial will provide a detailed
344. I created a list that contained different names of fruits. After I had printed the list, Python entered the while loop because it found the value ‘apple’ at least once. When Python entered the loop, it removed the first instance and returned to the while loop. Then it once again entered the while line and removed another instance. It kept repeating the circle until it removed the last instance of the word ‘apple.’
345. To demonstrate how this works, we’ll use the well-known iris flower dataset to train the model and test it. The model will be built to determine the flower classifications.
346. Tin Tin is sitting at the moment on the top of the mountain.
347. takes up approximately half of the book and focuses on machine learning, including a discussion on algorithms.
348. In real-life scenarios, it is considered disposable because it is non-parametric, which means it makes no underlying assumptions about the data distribution. Some prior data, the training data, is provided, and this uses attributes to classify the coordinates into specific groups.
349. Confusion matrices provide more detail in the breakdown of right and wrong classifications for each individual class. In this case, we will use the Iris dataset for classification and computation of the confusion matrix:
350. Please note the information contained within this document is for educational and entertainment purposes only. Every attempt has been made to provide accurate, up to date and reliable complete information. No warranties of any kind are expressed or implied. Readers acknowledge that the author is not engaging in the rendering of legal, financial, medical or professional advice.
351. There you go. The only thing you are doing is taking advantage of the arguments in the function to generate any other function you can use to obtain the required information. This is an elegant way to work with code. If you are a developer, you need to understand how to do this in any case.
352. Use AI for content creation while maintaining authenticity
353. Here are some ways generative AI helps with sentiment analysis:
354. ageworkclassfnlwgteducationeducation.nummarital.statusoccupationrelationshipracesexcapital.gaincapit
355. cover important topics like copyright concerns, the risks of over-relying on AI-generated content, and how to maintain quality and originality in your work.
356. Traditional programming involves input data being fed into a machine, together with a clean, tested program, to generate some output. With machine learning, the input and the output data are fed to the machine during the initial phase, known as the learning phase. From there, the machine will work the programming out for itself.
357. Both the information gain and Gini Index methods select the right attribute to place at the internal node or root node.
358. “Difference between Data Science and Machine Learning: All You Need to Know in 2021.”
359. The next sections should include the body of the docstring and should contain a description of the function’s parameters. You can also include a longer description of the function
360. "TechExplorationHub.com" creates visually striking thumbnails for its videos and organizes them into playlists such as "Tech Reviews," enhancing both user engagement and SEO.
361. Integration of AI in Writing: The chapter explains how AI tools, like Grammarly and other specialized solutions, have become essential in refining grammar, style, and overall quality of written content. This integration makes it challenging to distinguish between texts written solely by humans and those generated by AI.
362. . Choose a domain name: Choose a unique domain name that reflects
363. For example, during big events like elections or sports tournaments, AI can analyze tweets to see how people are
364. “A Guide to Machine Learning Algorithms and Their Applications.”
365. Sentiment analysis is like teaching a computer to be an emotion detective. It’s a powerful tool that can help businesses, researchers, and even everyday people understand how others feel about various topics. With generative AI, we can take this a step further, creating more flexible and powerful sentiment analysis tools.
366. For this one, you use to_excel() but it isn’t quite as straightforward as the CSV file:
367. Consider using long-tail keywords with lower search volume
368. The most well-known and popular generative AI with a WebChat interface is OpenAI. Importantly, OpenAI provides an API for its models, allowing for easy integration with other company systems and various automation types.
369. They opted for a soution called WhiteCube.ai, named AI SEO Squad
370. Python doesn’t always require the else block at the tail of the if-elif chain. The else block is sometimes useful. However, in some cases, the elif statement is the one that is of primary interest and benefit.
371. the work for you, like the AI SEO Team from WhiteCube.ai mentioned earlier.
372. First, we create  four new columns, one each for England, Germany, Spain, and Other, which contains all the other nationalities:
373. By the time you finish this chapter, you’ll have a clear roadmap for leveraging AI in your SEO strategy. Whether you’re running a small business, managing a marketing team, or creating content, you’ll be equipped with the knowledge to start implementing AI-powered SEO techniques immediately.
374. tail keywords (more specific phrases) and short-tail
375. significant importance to the main heading, so ensure it
376. An Introduction to Data Science and Machine Learning
377. Built-in functions and methods also return file objects. In the example below, we will look at how you can open a plain text file within the same directory where the interpreter began:
378. Now that you have this information, you can break this URL into different value pairs based on the query parameters.
379. Generative AI is a type of artificial intelligence that can create new content based on provided data and patterns. Unlike traditional AI, which primarily analyzes and processes data, generative AI can produce something entirely new from the given information.
380. from sklearn.naive_bayes import GaussianNB
381. It is assumed that the attributes are categorical for information gain and continuous for the Gini index.
382. It doesn't matter what industry you are in, machine learning can work for you. Wherever it is applied, it can give businesses the means and answers they need to make better decisions and provide their customers with a more personal user experience.
383. website through search engine results (excluding paid ads). In
384. It is simple to access values in a dictionary. To get a value linked to a key, you need to enter the name of a dictionary and then fill it up with the key in square brackets. The following example contains the practical example for accessing values.
385. Typically, entropy will change when a node is used to divide training instances in a decision tree into smaller sets. Information gain is one measure of change.
386. # train the model using the training sets
387. Identifiers and variables are both maintained in the computer’s memory. The values can be changed when you modify the variable and its value stored in the memory. This chapter will look at the different types of variables you can use when writing a program in Python.
388. When he’s not coding or exploring new AI technologies, Andrzej enjoys traveling and experiencing different cultures. His move from Poland to sunny Florida in 2015 reflects his adventurous spirit and adaptability – qualities that also shine through in his approach to technology and problem-solving.
389. You can include further conditional sections using the elif keyword (an abbreviation of else-if, which is not a Python keyword); statements following elif will be evaluated only if the previous test fails (i.e., the conditional expression is False).
390. Well-trained generative AI, tuned to the tone of your blog and brand
391. The basic principle of LLM models, as many explain in layman’s terms, involves choosing the most likely next words based on probabilities. These probabilities are learned from vast amounts of text written by humans. Thus, a well-trained model can produce text that sets words in a way that most likely resembles human writing. Therefore, there is no simple or reliable way to differentiate such text from that written by a human.
392. Model evaluation methods fall into two distinct categories – cross-validation and holdout. Both use test sets, which are datasets of completely new, previously unseen data, to evaluate the performance. As you already know by now, using the same data you train a model on to test it is not recommended because the model will not learn anything – it will simply memorize what you trained it on. The predictions will always be correct anywhere in the training set. This is called overfitting.
393. The machine learning model is trained on the data
394. elcome to Chapter 6, where we’ll explore the exciting world of AI tools that can supercharge your SEO efforts. This chapter is your guide to the various AI-powered solutions available in the market today.
395. be used only once on a page and should contain the main
396. Brazil houses largest Amazon rainforests.
397. about a specific product, such as price, availability, and customer
398. Informational keywords are exactly what the name suggests: keywords used to discover information on a specific subject. Depending on the niche, informational keywords often have great search volume. However, because they are informational in nature, they are not very good at conversion. Informational keywords contain the following phrases: ‘where, how, what’, and any other ‘question words’.
399. aims to bridge the gap between complex AI concepts and their real-world implementation in digital marketing and content strategies.
400. The example content illustrates the impact of backlinks on SEO using the hypothetical example of 'TechInsights.' The reference to the TechInsights website provides a real-world example of a site benefiting from a strong backlink profile. This content aims to emphasize the importance of quality over quantity and suggests effective link-building strategies for SEO success.
401. they’re like the secret ingredients that make AI so smart and creative.
402. # fit function is used to train the model using the training sets as parameters
403. Implement AI-driven tools that continuously analyze content performance and suggest optimizations for improved search engine rankings.
404. The book assumes that you already have experience defining and using functions, calling object methods, assigning variables, controlling program flow, and all the other basic Python tasks. It is designed to introduce you to the data science libraries in Python, such as NumPy, Pandas, Seaborn, Scikit-Learn, and so on, showing you how to use them to store and manipulate data and gain valuable insights you can use in your work.
405. Dear reader, as this book has shown you, although SEO may at first glance seem complicated, and ranking your website first on Google may seem like something requiring the services of a highly paid SEO professional, you need not buy into that misconception.
406. Translation: AI can help translate languages, making it easier for people from different countries to understand each other.
407. AI tools can automate the process of crawling websites and analyzing technical SEO aspects, identifying issues and recommending solutions in realtime.
408. The object mode used in the example above will return an object different from the default file object. The default contains the same information in byte format. Use this if you want to handle any audio data or image. The write mode (w) lets you change the contents of the file completely. Using the append mode (a) you can add information to the end of the file. This last option is useful for creating log files.
409. questions, and gain insights from experienced practitioners. These
410. All these algorithms work together to make generative AI so powerful. They help AI understand and create text, images, music, and even videos. It’s like giving a computer a paintbrush, a pen, and a musical instrument all at once!
411. For example, in a game called “No Man’s Sky,” AI creates entire planets for players to explore. Each planet is unique, with its own animals, plants, and landscapes. It’s like having a magic machine that can create endless new worlds!
412. If someone tries to change the Python language, they start writing Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP). One of the oldest PEPs is the PEP8. It instructs Python programmers on how they can style their code. PEP 8 is fairly lengthy. However, most can relate to a highly complex coding structure than what you might have seen until now.
413. The AI revolution in SEO offers exciting opportunities for businesses and individuals to enhance their online presence. By understanding and leveraging these technologies, you’re well-positioned to thrive in the digital future.
414. it stands out as a specialized AI-driven copywriting assistant designed for creating marketing content that aligns with a brand’s tone of voice. Using a mix of its proprietary model and GPT-3, Jasper helps generate various types of marketing
415. about how to leverage AI in your SEO strategy while maintaining compliance with Google’s guidelines and best practices.
416. src="https://files.realpython.com/media/real-python-logo-thumbnail.7f0db70c2ed2.jpg"
417. to provide search engines with more detailed information about the
418. However, this reliance on AI also raises questions about originality and authenticity. If AI is contributing significantly to the creation of content, who is the true author? This is particularly relevant in creative fields such as literature, journalism, and advertising, where the unique voice of the creator is highly valued. There is a growing need to balance the use of AI with the preservation of human creativity and originality.
419. Advantages and Disadvantages of Machine Learning
420. X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.4,
421. For content creators, Google advises focusing on creating original, high-quality, people-oriented content that exhibits the E-E-A-T traits. Creators can learn more about the E-E-A-T concept on Google’s help page about creating useful and
422. Using iterrows() lets you loop efficiently over the rows as pairs – index, Series. In simple terms, the result will be (index, row) tuples.
423. Decision Tree Machine Learning Algorithm
424. In this chapter, we will build a web scraper using which you can obtain or extract the information of all developer job postings on the Internet. We are considering a fake website with the information we want to scrape. The web scraper you develop is now going to be used to scrape the HTML elements from the website, using which you can pick the relevant details. You can also use the scraper to filter the needed information.
425. It is important to understand certain aspects of Python before you dive into writing code to scrape information from the Internet. The following are some points to remember:
426. Another important aspect was that the chat we chose was fully dedicated to our industry. It had been trained on the professional vocabulary and nuances of our field, honed to understand clients and their inquiries best. Additionally, as a standout feature, it could integrate with our product database (in our case, yacht listings) and suggest or search for the most suitable options for the client during the conversation.
427. plt.scatter(reg.predict(X_train), reg.predict(X_train) - y_train,
428. In this book, we’ll start by explaining what AI is and how it works in simple, everyday terms. You’ll learn about the different types of AI and how they’re being used in various industries. Then, we’ll dive into the exciting ways AI is being applied to create content for websites and how this is reshaping the world of SEO.
429. But AI might also create new jobs we haven’t even thought of yet!
430. Remember that technology, especially the latest advancements, is constantly evolving. AI develops rapidly and changes frequently. Every day, new tools and opportunities emerge.
431. We can keep K as an odd number, making it easier to work out the clear majority where there are only two possible groups. As K increases, the boundaries across the classifications become more defined and smoother. And, as the number of data points increases in the training set, the better the classifier accuracy becomes.
432. It is important to understand and conceptualize the scope of any function. Bear in mind that the function is a black box that can take in the source information, process it, and pass the value onto the main program. The code in the main program that sends the source data and receives the result is known as the calling procedure. This does not mean the main program needs to know the lines of code that are in the black box. The source data and results should be defined clearly.
433. Consistent NAP details build trust with both users and search engines. Strategic Placement:
434. However, I would like to briefly mention a particular subset of AI systems that recommend products to customers based on their profiles and the similarity of their choices to those of other customers.
435. In this chapter, I will explain how you can use the input() function to build a program that interacts with users.
436. cat = train.select_dtypes(include=['O'])
437. Your solutions should be compatible and creative. Most programming consists of small and common approaches to fairly simple situations for creating a larger and creative project.
438. Logistic regression is used to model the default class's probability. For example, let's say we are modeling sex (male or female) based on a person's height. In that case, the default class might be male, and the model is written for the probability of a male, given a certain height. More formally, that would be:
439. Buturla, E. (2020, June 5). How To Become A Task Automation Hero Using Python [With Examples]. Monterail. https://www.monterail.com/blog/python-task-automation-examples#:~:text=Reading%20and%20writing%20files%20is,an%20approach%20I%20highly%20recommend.
440. Andrzej’s passion for AI and its practical applications in SEO and content creation led him to write this book. Drawing from his vast experience and continuous learning in the field, he
441. Not every job listed on the website has the title developer in it. So, instead of looking at all jobs on the website, you can use keywords to filter this information. On most of these websites, the second header element will contain the job title information. If you want to look only for specific jobs, use the following string argument. Alternatively, you can also use functions, and we will look at this in detail in the next section:
442. Mujtaba, Hussain. “Machine Learning Tutorial for Beginners | Machine Learning with Python.”
443. elcome to Chapter 8, where we’ll explore the potential pitfalls and challenges of using AI in SEO. While AI offers exciting opportunities, it’s important to be aware of the risks and how to avoid them.
444. Each decision tree created by the random forest algorithm has a high variance. However, when they are all combined in parallel, the variance is low. That’s because the individual trees are trained perfectly on the specified sample data, and the output is not dependent on just one tree but all of them. In classification problems,  a majority voting classifier is used to get the final output. In regression problems, the output is the result of aggregation – the mean of all outputs.
445. Generative AI is also really good at understanding how people feel about things. This is called sentiment analysis. It’s like having a friend who can always tell if you’re happy, sad, or angry just by listening to what you say!
446. The World Wide Web is a vast information forest. Naturally, in a forest, it is easy to get lost: enter search engines. Using the forest as an example, search engines serve two major functionalities: create an index of all trees in the information forest, and provide forest visitors with a detailed path to the tree species they want. This sounds oddly technical so let us simplify it as follows:
447. Add unique and relevant keywords to your Meta data, i.e. exact match, long tail, and LSI keywords (latent semantic keywords are keywords similar to your main keyword
448. "DataInnovateTech.com" integrates AI into
449. The Number of Domains Linking Back To Your Site
450. The debate around which is the best SEO keyword tool is a pepper-hot one, and every marketer is quick to push this or that paid or free keyword research tool and terming it as the best.
451. Instead of just using individual tools for creating SEO content with AI, it’s worthwhile to take it a step further and apply comprehensive automation.
452. This is the approach I took in another company, where I helped automate content creation using Generative AI.
453. for iteration in xrange(training_iterations):
454. Can AI-Written Text Be Recognized?
455. university_towns.txt – This is a text file that contains information about the college towns in the US
456. Don't forget that a Series object is similar to a DataFrame's column, which explains why it is easy to add them to existing DataFrames. Also, note that the previous observation we made about .loc[] remains valid, even when adding columns.
457. . You will need a Google account to log in (a Gmail account). After logging into GKP, you want to click on the ‘search for new keywords using a phrase, website, or category’, plug in the URL of the competitor page, and ‘get ideas’
458. Working with numbers is the most straightforward thing. However, if you start getting unexpected results, you need to check whether Python interprets the numbers the way you want it to.
459. print("\nThis again is the original list.")
460. - Google My Business: Coastal Coffee Haven, 123 Main St, Suite 101,
461. AI is becoming a helpful assistant to doctors. It can:
462. Creating training simulations: These help people practice real jobs in a safe, computer-generated world.
463. A telling example is when one of the most popular current tools for detecting AI-generated content was used to analyze a book of the Bible. The results were not only surprising but intriguing. As you might guess, the analysis suggested that the Bible was generated by AI.
464. : Clearly indicate who created the content, explain how it was produced, and the reasons behind its creation to align with E-E-A-T principles. Transparency, especially regarding automation and AI usage, is encouraged.
465. The next step is to verify whether Pip was installed on the system or not. If you opted to install the older version of Python, it might not come with a preinstalled Pip. Pip is an extremely powerful package management system to create software packages in Python, so make sure it is installed. I recommend that you use Pip for different Python packages when you are working inside certain virtual environments.
466. The easiest way to access the information you need on the website is to set up the DOM hierarchy. This will begin with the header two elements which the script identified. You can also look at the HTML of the job posting if needed, and see which header contains the information about the job. You can choose that element along with the closest parent element which contains the information you need:
467. Please enter 'quit' to close the program: Brazil houses largest Amazon rainforests.
468. It’s important to make sure AI is fair to everyone, just like we try to be fair when we play games with our friends.
469. When you process data by using the for loop, you will find out that this is the best way to summarize a specific operation usually performed on a complete data set. For an app that deals with groceries, you can let the users go through all the fruits and vegetable items to see what is available to buy.
470. According to some SEO theory, links from a homepage carry much more weight compared to links to other pages on the same domain.
471. Use AI-driven predictive analytics to anticipate future SEO trends and proactively optimize the website to align with emerging search patterns.
472. frequently evaluating model efficacy is a critical part of maintaining measurement reliability in machine learning. Classification, regression, and other methods are used to evaluate consistency and error rates in models, along with assessment plans, and knowledge of these is vital.
473. In 1989, he was working on a microkernel-based system called Amoeba. For that system, he developed certain system utilities. While he was working on them, he realized that program development in C used to consume too much time and energy. He decided that he would spend his free time building a dedicated language to help him finish his work quickly.
474. Imagine you have a website, and you want more people to find it when they search online. That’s what SEO, or Search Engine Optimization, is all about. It’s the art and science of making your website more visible and attractive to search engines like Google. Now, AI, or Artificial Intelligence, is like a super-smart helper that can make this process easier, faster, and more effective than ever before.
475. # training the model on training set
476. claim your business listing. Verify your ownership using the
477. In the ever-evolving landscape of digital marketing, the integration of artificial intelligence (AI) into SEO strategies is becoming increasingly crucial. In this guide, we'll explore how "DataInnovateTech.com" utilizes AI for SEO to stay ahead of the curve.
478. Thank you for taking the time to read my guide. Data science is one of the most used buzzwords of the current time, which will not change. With the sheer amount of data being generated daily, companies rely on data science to help them move their business forward, interact intelligently with their customers, and ensure they provide exactly that their customers need when they need it.
479. print(veg_item1.title() + " is not available at the store right now.")
480. Prepare to gain crucial insights that will shape your approach to AI in SEO and help you stay ahead in the ever-evolving digital landscape!
481. https://meowapps.com/products/ai-engine-pro/
482. Machine learning is a subset of data science, enabling machines to learn things without the need for a human to program them. Machine learning analyzes data using algorithms and prepares possible predictions without human intervention. It involves the computer learning a series of inputs in the form of details, observations, or commands, and it is used extensively by companies such as Google and Facebook.
483. This is used to calculate the trained classifier's accuracy score.
484. and how it has evolved to closely mimic human writing. You’ll discover why this question has become increasingly relevant and challenging to answer as AI technology advances.
485. Python also takes in some default values. You can define the value of your choice to default values for each parameter. If you fail to provide arguments to a function call, it will pick up the default values and produce the results. This helps in multiple function calls where you can miss out on one call and then let the function use the default values to finish the function call. In the following example, I will define the default values for a function and use them in the function call.
486. A specific data or question is designed, and the source is obtained to work out what data we need
487. is akin to being classically trained in any subject, i.e. having expert knowledge. This is important to ensure the right questions are asked and the answers placed in the right context.
488. By carefully managing these aspects, companies can harness the full potential of AI to enhance their operations while avoiding the pitfalls that come with technology adoption. This balanced approach will be essential as businesses navigate the increasingly digital and AI-driven landscape.
489. information while maintaining readability.
490. Optimize your website’s technical SEO using AI-powered solutions
491. Keep learning: The integration of AI into SEO is an ongoing process. Commit to continuous learning and improvement.
492. Let us assume you surf the information on a website or are often looking for a new job. However, you are not looking for information about just any job. If you have this mindset, the only thing you need to wait for is the perfect opportunity.
493. However, many fail to see or choose to ignore because data science is quite possibly the ONLY label that could be given to the cross-discipline skill set that is fast becoming one of the most important in applications. It isn't possible to place data science firmly into one discipline; that much is definitely true. It comprises three areas, all distinct and all overlapping:
494. Cost-effective marketing: Unlike paid advertising, SEO doesn't require a
495. That means that machine learning is an AI application that allows software to learn by experience, continually improving without explicit programming. For example, think about writing a program to identify vegetables based on properties such as shape, size, color, etc.
496. Since websites are very different, you may encounter repetitive structures. Every website is different and needs to be treated differently, especially if you want to obtain the relevant information.
497. n this pivotal chapter, we delve into one of the most crucial aspects of using AI for SEO: Google’s official position on AI-generated content. As the dominant force in search, Google’s
498. Guideline: Focus on content quality. Panda penalizes low-quality content and duplicate content. Create original, valuable content, and regularly audit and update your website to maintain content quality.
499. Generative AI differs from traditional AI systems in that it doesn’t just analyze and classify data but actively creates new, unique content based on the knowledge it has acquired.
500. from sklearn.cross_validation import train_test_split
501. The sort() method in Python makes it easy to sort out the list. I will use the same to explain how to use the sort() method. I am assuming that the values that are stored in the list are in lowercase.
502. Holdout evaluation tests models on different data to the training data, providing an unbiased learning performance estimate. The dataset will be divided into three random subsets:
503. In some cases, the effect was almost immediate, especially if the website had strong existing metrics like core vitals, domain authority, etc., and faced less aware competitors. In other scenarios, especially with brand new sites, it took a bit longer. But yes, it always worked, regardless of whether the site was new or established. In every known case where it was implemented correctly, it simply worked.
504. It’s exciting to think about how this technology might be used in the future. One day, we’ll have AI assistants that can understand our moods and help cheer us up when we’re feeling down!
505. Practical tips for using AI in content creation while staying in Google’s good graces
506. If you do decide to use these tools, (they make competition analysis ‘on the fly’ a breeze), pay special attention to page rank, page authority (shown by the MOZBar plugin), referring domains (LD), and domain authority.
507. It is called supervised learning because we already know what the output will be, and we provide it to the machine. Each time it runs, the algorithm is corrected, and this continues until we get the best possible results. The data set is used to train the algorithm to an optimal outcome.
508. Next, let’s create a dictionary that contains the proportion values for each of these:
509. Details of Guns: One Round Four
510. The if-elif-else chain is robust, and it is quite appropriate for usage when you need just a single test to pass. As soon as Python finds a test will pass, it will skip the other tests. This behavior is quite beneficial because it is quite efficient and will allow you to test a specific condition.
511. def train_using_gini(X_train, X_test, y_train):
512. Make music: AI can compose new songs in different styles. It’s like having a musician who knows every instrument and can play any type of music.
513. Google has embraced AI-generated content, provided it meets their quality standards and follows E-E-A-T guidelines.
514. explained_variance_score = 1 – Var{y – y’}/Var{y}
515. If you want to understand how this works, you can change or update the parameters. This will help you observe the change in the URL based on the queries. Enter the values in the URL and search the relevant details in the URL. You can also work on changing the values directly in the URL. Consider the URL below, and see how it would change the address.
516. There could be some differences running Python on different operating systems, and I will point this out in the book if it is necessary. Otherwise, the codes in the book will work in the same way across different operating systems. This is one of the many good points of Python. In this book, we will look at writing programs using Python. If you want more information about Python, read the documentation written by the Python developers. It is available at
517. Guideline: Create content that answers user queries comprehensively. Hummingbird emphasizes semantic search
518. Working with unstructured data obtained from different networks
519. A histogram generates approximations to distributions by using a set range to select results, placing each value set in a bucket or bin. Using Matplotlib makes this kind of visualization straightforward.
520. through comments and discussions can help you gain further insights
521. A Python list is an array of pointers. Each pointer points to a specific location containing information that relates to the element. As far as computation and memory go, this adds a significant overhead cost. To make matters worse, when all the stored objects are the same type, most of the additional information becomes redundant, meaning the extra cost for no reason.
522. The story of generative AI began a long time ago, in the 1950s and 1960s. It was like we were learning to build the first blocks that would later become a big castle.
523. "DataInnovateTech.com" employs AI algorithms to generate data-centric articles. Additionally, AI tools regularly analyze user interactions and suggest optimizations to enhance content relevance and SEO impact.
524. When you spend time writing a new program or code, bear in mind that it all begins with a problem. Only when you know the problem statement can you develop or design the code to overcome the problem. Before you write code for anything, develop an idea of what you would like to create and the problem you are looking to solve. This will help you develop a fair idea of how you would like to solve the problem.
525. We covered how to get on-page SEO right; therefore, other than mention its importance in preparing your pages and content for linking, here, we shall avoid talking about how to get your on-page SEO right. As an additional On-page SEO tip, ensure a well-structured site, use exact match, long tail, and LSI keywords, optimize your Meta data, media, and optimize the other on-page SEO elements discussed earlier.
526. #Split data into train and test set.
527. Thank you for joining me on this journey through the world of AI and SEO. Here’s to your success in the AI-powered digital landscape!
528. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a clear understanding of how to leverage AI for full SEO automation, allowing you to scale your efforts and stay competitive in the ever-evolving digital marketplace. So, let’s get started and unlock the power of full automation in your SEO strategy!
529. While this step may seem irrelevant, it is a key step in that it helps you create a sort of brain dump of searches potential clients and target audiences are making. While the list you create will not be your final keyword list, it will give you a firm understanding on which key areas of your niche you should target.
530. Writing ads: AI can write many different versions of an ad to see which one people like best.
531. Here are some key aspects of generative AI:
532. Finally, ethical considerations and best practices in using AI and automation in digital marketing cannot be overlooked. As technology becomes more capable of making decisions, ensuring these decisions are fair and do not perpetuate biases is crucial. Transparency in how AI is used, the data it analyzes, and the decisions it influences is essential to maintain trust and comply
533. Machine learning models need vast amounts of data to learn, but the quantity of day is only a small part. It must be high-quality, unbiased data, and there must be enough of it. At times, you may even need to wait until new data has been generated before you can train the model.
534. We tested several paid and free tools to source news, but ultimately, the Google RSS News Feed worked best for us.
535. title's first 50-60 characters. Ensure that your title remains
536. - Consistent Formatting: Maintain a standardized format for your NAP details.
537. That said, it is a good idea to sprinkle a good measure of keywords within your copy. The idea here is to use keywords in your copy only if the use of such keywords comes across natural and adds value to users (Google search is very user driven).
538. For example, if an AI learns from books written a long time ago, it might think old-fashioned ideas are still true today.
539. These networks are great for creating and changing images. They can take a picture of a dog and turn it into a painting, or they can create a completely new picture of a dog that doesn’t exist in real life.
540. with regulatory standards. Staying informed about these aspects is just as important as keeping up with technical updates, ensuring that professionals use AI responsibly and effectively in their strategies.
541. You could hardcode it all, add a few rules which you use to identify the vegetables. To some, this might seem to be the only way that will work, but there isn’t one programmer who can write the perfect rules that will work for all cases. That’s where machine learning comes in, without any rules – this makes it more practical and robust. Throughout this chapter, you will see how machine learning can be used for this task.
542. BACCO SEIP Project Bangladesh. e-Mail: inboundgarage@gmail.com
543. Despite these challenges, the future of generative AI looks very exciting!
544. Context-Aware Writing Assistants: AI’s ability to analyze tone, sentiment, and intent is discussed, illustrating how it can fine-tune content for specific purposes, such as making marketing copy more persuasive or technical documents clearer.
545. from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
546. Sentiment analysis shows how AI doesn’t just understand the words we use, but can also pick up on the emotions behind them. This helps create better communication between people and machines, making our interactions with technology more natural and helpful.
547. Because they are specific, and users using them to search for information are specific about the information they are searching for, long tail keywords are often the best keywords to rank for because they drive targeted traffic.
548. Data scientists know how to turn raw data into something a business can use. They know how to spot algorithmic coding and process the data, with knowledge of statistics and artificial learning. Some of the top companies in the world use data analytics, including Netflix, Amazon, airlines, fraud prevention departments, healthcare, etc.
549. Making characters in games smarter: AI can make the characters in games act more like real people.
550. You will more often need to take one action upon passing one conditional test and another action in the other cases. The if-else syntax will make it extremely possible. The if-else block is extremely similar to the if statement. The only difference is that the else statement allows you to define a set of actions or a single action that should be executed whenever a particular conditional test fails.
551. In the following section, I will explain how you can use Python variables. You can add a new line at the start of the file and then modify the second line. See how I will do that.
552. Each data point is used as the test set once and is part of the training set k number of times, in our case, nine. The reduces the bias significantly as almost all the data is used for fitting. It also reduces variance significantly because almost all the data is used in the test set. This method's effectiveness is increased because the test and training sets are interchanged.
553. Every section of the code that performs some function, like an assignment, is called a statement. The part of the code that can be evaluated to obtain a value is called an expression. Let us take a look at the following example:
554. At Google, we’ve long believed in the power of AI to transform the ability to deliver helpful information. In this post, we’ll share more about how AI-generated content fits into our long-standing approach to show helpful content to people on Search.
555. if a certain condition is true:
556. The last line in the function specifies the variable you will send to the main program. If there is nothing to return, do not include the return statement in your function block. The compiler will return None as the value if there is no return function.
557. In this case, to fully automate the process, we had to do most of the work ourselves. We didn’t have tools available that could do it quickly and efficiently for us.
558. Improving customer service: AI can help identify upset customers quickly, so human helpers can step in to solve problems faster. It’s like having a special alarm that rings when someone needs extra help.
559. If you look at the above code, you will see that the items selected were exactly what you have requested as the target variable. You only looked for the second header element in the job posting website. This code contains the information “python,” and you will notice that these elements do not include any other information about the job posting. You would have received an error message:
560. Guideline: Optimize for natural language. BERT improves the understanding of context in search queries. Craft content that reflects natural language and addresses the specific intent behind user queries.
561. stance significantly impacts how we approach AI in our SEO strategies.
562. If you must install the language on any other operating system, it is best to download the latest version of Python, which is version 3.9.0. The following link has instructions for Unix-like systems, such as AIX and Linux:
563. How Important Is Machine Learning?
564. london = pub.str.contains('London')
565. Internal links are links that point back to a page or piece of content on your website. While their ranking power is debatable, interlinking pages can increase your ranking. Outbound links are links pointing to external sites. If you include links pointing to authoritative sites, Google takes this to mean your aim is to provide users with more information about a subject and uses this as a trust signal.
566. This is no different in the case of the AI revolution. The rapid developments we are witnessing necessitate a fresh look at many aspects of content creation, SEO, and marketing in general.
567. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a comprehensive understanding of the current landscape of AI text recognition. You’ll be equipped with knowledge about the capabilities and limitations of AI detection tools, and how this impacts your content strategy.
568. X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size = 0.70)
569. One of the biggest questions about generative AI is: “Who owns what the AI creates?”
570. This section only contains a handful of tasks that can be automated using Python. The section does not provide too much information for each task, but it will give you an idea of where to start. If you are new to automating tasks with Python, these are simple ideas, to begin with.
571. Most businesses use data analysis effectively to expand, and data scientists are in the highest demand across many industries. If you are considering getting involved in data science, these are some of the best careers you can train for:
572. these develop intelligent computer programs, and they specialize in machine learning and artificial intelligence. Their main aim is to create algorithms that work effectively and implement them in the right way. They design complex functions, plan flowcharts, graphs, layouts, product documentation, tables, and other visual aids. They are also responsible for composing code and evaluating it, creating tech specs, updating programs and managing them, and more.
573. Do I really need to use AI in SEO?
574. I have so far worked with just a single piece of information that users entered as input. I then printed that input on the screen of the interpreter. Next time through the while loop, I will receive an input value that would respond to the same. To keep track of different information and users, I will have to use different dictionaries and lists to pair up with the while loops. The for loop does not work well with dictionaries and lists.
575. train.target.value_counts()/train.shape[0]
576. . We had to properly adjust and train it, adding new connections like GMB, but everything eventually went smoothly, and within a week, we saw initial increases in organic traffic and rankings for some of our promoted keywords.
577. We’ll start with the easiest of examples to explain supervised learning. Let’s say you are trying to teach your child how to tell the difference between a cat and a dog. How do you do it?
578. Training a machine learning model is an important step in machine learning. Equally important is evaluating how the model works on previously unseen data and is something you should consider with every pipeline you build. You need to know if your model works and, if it does, whether its predictions can be trusted or not. Is the model memorizing the data you feed it, or is it learning by example? If it is only memorizing data, its predictions on unseen data will be next to useless.
579. As we look to the future, it’s evident that AI will continue to play an increasingly significant role in SEO. Those who embrace these technologies and learn to use them effectively will have a considerable advantage in the digital landscape.
580. Section 4: AI-Powered Technical SEO Audits
581. Machine learning is an ever-changing world and, the faster it evolves, the higher its significance is, and the more demand grows. One of the main explanations as to why data scientists can't live without machine learning is this – "high-value forecasts that direct smart decisions and behavior in real-time, without interference from humans."
582. Pay special attention to keyword research because it is an integral part of SEO and use LSI, long tail, and exact match keywords on your web copy and pages. Aim to create amazing, highly sharable, keyword-optimized, helpful content, and Google will love your website. Get your on-page SEO right by optimizing all the relevant areas.
583. # Train the model using the training sets
584. Section 4: Engaging Thumbnails and Playlists
585. Remember, maintaining a healthy and well-optimized
586. We’ll look briefly at each type before we turn our attention to the popular machine learning algorithms.
587. I have accessed values by entering the keys in the print statement. This is one method to access values in a dictionary. However, to use this method effectively, you need to know what your key is. You can keep a list of keys to access the related values, and you can have unlimited key-value pairs in a dictionary. You can use the information after you access it through a print statement.
588. It's fair to say that data visualization is a key part of analytical tasks, like exploratory data analysis, data summarization, model output analysis, and more. Python offers plenty of libraries and tools to help us gain good insights from data, and the most commonly used is Matplotlib. This library enables us to generate all different visualizations, all from the same code if you want.
589. Leverage AI tools for more efficient keyword research and analysis
590. ageworkclassfnlwgteducationeducation.nummarital.statusoccupationrelationshipracesexcapital.gaincapit al.losshours.per.weeknative.countrytarget
591. Additionally, practical applications in art, medicine, marketing, games, and natural language processing are discussed. The chapter concludes by addressing the challenges and future of generative AI, touching on ethics, copyright issues, and its potential to revolutionize various industries.
592. : Content created mainly to attract search engine visits, using automation excessively, summarizing others’ work without adding value, or focusing on trending topics without real expertise should be avoided.
593. though newer versions are likely in the near future. However, for the sake of this guide’s practicality, I’m sticking to the currently available names. Despite being less popular than its counterpart at OpenAI, Claude 3.5 currently leads in generating text from text, producing better results.
594. Machine learning algorithms can handle multi-variety and multidimensional data easily in uncertain or dynamic environments.
595. Here is the detail of the key feature of your player: Gun.
596. The real meaning of data science is found in the deep analysis of huge amounts of data contained in a company's archive. This involves working out where that data originated from, whether the data is of sufficient quality, and whether it can be used to move the business on in the future.
597. Although we have touched on everything keyword research, and you probably have more keywords than you would care to use, we should mention that since 66% of all SERP clicks go to the top three results, you MUST nail your content keyword research.
598. Link building remains a cornerstone of SEO, but its landscape has evolved, emphasizing quality over quantity. This guide unveils best practices for strategic link building, providing insights, an illustrative example, and a reference to a reputable website that has mastered these principles.
599. It differs from supervised learning in that there isn’t an available answer, so the agent determines what steps are needed to do the task. The machine uses its own experiences to learn when no training data is provided.
600. We want the Boston Housing dataset, which contains records describing suburbs or towns in Boston. The data came from the Boston SMSA (Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area) in 1970, and the attributes have been defined as:
601. The Google instant method is easy and straight forward. Head over to Google.com and type in your seed keyword. For our example, we shall use SEO as our head term and use it to discover popular searches for that topic.
602. At last, we can predict the house prices using our models and the predict function. Ensure that you get all the features that were in the data you used to train the model.
603. Creating game worlds: AI can help make huge game worlds filled with interesting things to explore.
604. WordPress users, as it easily provides everyone with the opportunity to leverage AI capabilities in SEO.
605. File "C:/Users/saifia computers/Desktop/python.py", line 2, in <module>
606. These code lines split the dataset into a ratio of 70:30 – 70% for training and 30% for testing. The parameter value for test_size is passed as 0.3. The variable called random_state is a pseudo-random number generator typically used in random sampling cases.
607. Data Science | Machine Learning | Python | C++ | Coding | Programming | JavaScript
608. Conclusion: Embracing the AI Revolution in SEO
609. From there, we’ll dive into practical strategies for implementing AI in your SEO efforts. You’ll learn how to:
610. However, if we leave comments open, we risk facing problems where users might negatively or unpleasantly react to our brand or product. With a high volume of posts, manually checking comments daily becomes an impossible task.
611. will aid you in these tricky situations.
612. A robot.txt file, on the other hand, is simply a file that lets Google spiders know not to index specific pages on your site. While it may seem contrary to the aim of search engine optimization, a robot.txt comes in very handy when you do not want Google to index specific information that may affect your rank.
613. On running the above code, you note every periodic state will have a university town name against it—for example, StateA TownA1 TownA2. If you look at how the names of the states are written, you will see that each one of them has the “[edit]” substring. You can also wrap the list around the DataFrame using a tuple.
614. The exponent can be shifted to the right again and written as:
615. x_train, x_test, y_train, y_test =train_test_split(X,Y, test_size = 0.30, random_state =5)
616. the dataset is preprocessed, then sklearn is used to split the dataset into test and train sets before training the classifier.
617. The Python style guide was produced with the aim that code is easily read than it is written. You will write your code once and start reading it as you begin the process of debugging. When you add new features to a Python program, you will need to spend time reading the code. When you share your code with other programmers, they will be able to read the code easily.
618. We’ll divide the data into two – 70% for training and 30% for testing.
619. The answer is straightforward; you’ll drop in Google search rankings. Perhaps you’ve already noticed this, or maybe it’s yet to come. But if you don’t take action, sooner or later, it will happen.
620. 1.3 Practical Applications of Generative AI
621. The rest of the automation process remains the same.
622. return X, Y, X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test
623. After the final statement, the indentation must go back to its original level: this will indicate to the interpreter that the conditional block has come to an end. Python marks out blocks of code using indentation alone; it doesn’t use punctuation marks like the curly braces you may see in other languages. This unique feature of Python means you have to be extra careful about indentation. If you do get it wrong, you’ll find out soon enough, as the interpreter will complain loudly.
624. # dividing the datasets into two parts i.e. training datasets and test datasets
625. Why do you think this happens? Python has a behavior termed late binding which states the value of variables used in the program are obtained from the functions in the code. In the above code, when the functions you return are called, the value of the variable ‘i’ is taken from the other sections in the code. The solution to this issue is quite the same:
626. With exponential growth in machine learning, a rise in the number of developers, and big data, the popularity of Python shot to the sky. The machine learning journey of Python got to the inflection point around September 2016 as per Google Trends, following the release of TensorFlow. This also is similar to the rise in the worldwide interest in the field of machine learning.
627. In the above example, the two pairs of lines are conditional statements. Before we look at these statements, let us understand how you should specify these conditions. Different values can be compared using the following operators:
628. Next, the data must be pre-processed. When we look at the dataset, we can immediately see that it doesn't contain any NaN values. We also see that the data is in numbers, not strings, so we don't need to worry about errors when we train the model.
629. Your answer is incorrect. Please try to run the code again.
630. Despite Python 3 being released around 13 years ago, people have been slow to adopt it, especially in web development and scientific communities. This is mostly down to the third-party packages not being made compatible right from the start. However, from 2014, those packages started to become available in stable releases, and more people have begun to adopt Python 3.
631. Additionally, we’ll discuss the ethical considerations surrounding AI-generated content and the importance of transparency in its use. You’ll learn about best practices for disclosing the use of AI in content creation and how this might affect user trust and engagement.
632. Implement AI chatbots to enhance user experience and engagement
633. At the moment, this DataFrame's data type is inferred. This is the default and, because numpy.nan has the float data type, that is the type of values the DataFrame will contain. However, the DataFrame can also be forced to be a specific type by using the dtype attribute and supplying the type you want, like this:
634. We’ll also address some of the challenges and potential pitfalls of using AI for SEO. You’ll learn about the ethical considerations, the importance of maintaining quality and originality, and how to strike the right balance between AI assistance and human creativity.
635. How to Leverage the AI Revolution in SEO
636. You can choose to compose longer prompts, but you may need to edit your code and write it again if you must do that. Longer prompts must be channeled into a variable for storage. Once stored, they must be passed toward the input() function. In this way, you can create longer prompts that span over multiple lines, and you will also be able to keep the code clean even after writing complex prompts.
637. Longer phrases containing multiple words that express a more specific user intent. Example:
638. Python dictionaries are humongous stores of data. You can create a dictionary and fill it up with a few pairs or a million pairs. It is easy to navigate through a short dictionary and really hard to do that with a large dictionary. That’s why when you are working with a longer dictionary, you should add a loop to the code. You can create a loop through a dictionary in several ways, like looping through all the key-value pairs or looping through only the keys or only the values.
639. I created a list of features that buyers are asking about to create a message to show buyers what the feature has. I also checked if the feature that the buyer is asking about is in the dictionary or not. If it is, the buyer gets a detailed message that also describes the feature to make the buying decision easier.
640. Various AI tools, from text generators to comprehensive automation solutions, are now available to enhance SEO strategies.
641. Everything has its advantages and disadvantages, and machine learning is no different:
642. # splitting X and y into training and testing sets
643. headline, it's vital to maintain their interest with a strong introduction.
644. As you close this book, I hope you feel empowered and excited about the possibilities that AI brings to SEO. The future of digital marketing is here, and it’s more accessible than you might have thought. Embrace it, experiment with it, and use it to take your online presence to new heights.
645. If only machine learning were as simple as just applying an algorithm to the data and obtaining the predictions. Sadly, it isn’t, and it involves many more steps for each project you do:
646. Throughout the book, we’ll share real-world examples and case studies of businesses and individuals who have successfully leveraged AI in their SEO efforts. You’ll see how AI can be applied in different industries and for various purposes, from e-commerce to blogging and beyond.
647. from Backlinko should remind you which on-page SEO elements you should pay attention to. Plus feel free to send us an email with your questions. Visit
648. "DataInnovateTech.com" employs an AI-driven keyword research tool that analyzes user queries to identify emerging trends. The website optimizes content based on these insights for improved SEO.
649. In this chapter, we’ll learn about the special “recipes” that make generative AI work. These recipes are called algorithms, and
650. elements. It’s best to avoid using images from other websites unless they’re from stock photo services that offer royalty-free rights. Instead, consider using generative AI to create the necessary images.
651. This round of testing may bring new issues to light. To help you keep track of what’s going on with your code, do the minimum necessary to get the new code to pass its tests. If the new code fails, you should roll back the changes to the point where the code passes again. Also, if using the function doesn’t work, don’t sweat it: reverse the changes and move on. No rule says you have to abstract everything into a function.
652. he AI revolution is here, and it’s transforming the landscape of SEO. In this chapter, we’ll explore how you can harness this powerful technology to supercharge your search engine optimization efforts.
653. The data may not have any rows containing duplicate values for the specified columns. If they do, an error message is thrown. If your data cannot be unique, you must use a different method, pivot_table():
654. You can also create arrays containing nothing but zeros. This is done with the np.zeros() method, ensuring you pass the shape of the array you want:
655. Data science also requires a high level of domain awareness. In fact, it's fair to say that it relies on it. If you have no knowledge of computer science and statistics, you will find it hard to solve any data science problem.
656. insights into their preferences, interests, and pain points.
657. trustworthy content. Evaluating your content in terms of “Who,” “How,” and “Why” will help maintain compliance with Google systems that reward valuable content. Google does not prohibit the use of AI in content creation, provided it is not used to manipulate search results.
658. When you call the .find_all() function using the objects present in the Beautiful Soup library, you can obtain the iterable objects that contain the details of all the job listings based on the keywords found. Now, consider the following code:
659. This tends to worsen when Python needs to do loads of operations over and again, such as adding two arrays. Python must check each element's data type whenever an operation has to be performed, slowing things down, but we can get over this by using ufuncs.
660. Using this strategy to create backlinks involves three steps: perform a backlink analysis on related websites, find the broken link, reach out to the webmaster, and inform him or her about the link rot. Your aim here is to inform the webmaster of the dead link and provide an alternative link, your link.
661. If you can’t find a solution tailored to your industry, try reaching out to the creators of the chatbot that best fits your needs and inquire about customizing it to match your specific requirements. It may initially cost more, but it will pay off in
662. its technical SEO audits. Automated tools continuously crawl the website, providing real-time insights and predictions for future SEO trends, allowing the website to stay ahead in optimization efforts. Reference: DataInnovateTech.com
663. As a search engine-ranking factor, trust and domain authority have evolved. In the early days of search, domain age was an important ranking factor. Fast forward to today, since Google web crawlers and search algorithm have evolved, so has domain trust and authority.
664. There is no prior knowledge of Python required to read the book. I started the book from the basics and took it over to object-oriented programming, which falls into the advanced level domain. I just touched the concept slightly to give you a flavor of how you can use Python in the practical world.
665. The simplest form of addition of elements to lists in Python is through the append method. When you try to append an item to a Python list, the new element is immediately added to the tail of the list. I will use the same list and try to add new elements to it through the append method.
666. The integration of AI in writing extends beyond mere correction and suggestion. It includes predictive text generation, where the AI anticipates the next word or sentence a writer intends to type. This feature, widely used in smartphone keyboards and email applications, significantly speeds up the writing process
667. When dealing with full-scale automation, especially where dozens of blog posts and social media updates are published daily across various platforms, it’s crucial to keep everything in check.
668. Section 3: Personalized User Experience with AI
669. https://yachting.ai/ai-yacht-boat-chatbot/
670. This is the result you will have. You will see a neat and clean formatted output on the interpreter screen. You also can use the string methods that I have already explained in the datatype section to format the output furthermore. Here is what happens when you enter the index number that never exists, like an out-of-range index number.
671. This is a common error most users obtain when they perform web scraping, especially if this is being done on the Internet. You also need to look at the HTML element in the list extracted to understand what the information looks like and where you believe this error will come from.
672. 2.1 Long-Tail Keyword Research:
673. A company called Phrasee uses AI to write email subject lines that make people want to open the emails. It’s like having a friend who always knows the most interesting thing to say!
674. So, what’s stopping us from just doing that? Well, the issue lies in how LLMs and Generative AI operate in general. I’ve discussed how this works in the early chapters of this book. Given a topic, LLMs generate words that best fit thematically. By adjusting the temperature, we can control how creative the output will be.
675. "VisibilityMasters.com" maintains an active presence on LinkedIn and Twitter, sharing industry insights, blog posts, and engaging with their audience. Social media becomes a valuable channel for driving traffic to the website. Reference: VisibilityMasters.com
676. From all the job postings on the Internet, you only want to see the title, location and company. You can do this easily using Beautiful Soup, and you can add the .text function or method to any object from the library. This will only return the relevant information to the object or element you contained. The following code can be used:
677. . Recipe: Use this markup for recipes on your website, including details
678. As AI gets better at doing things, some jobs might change or disappear.
679. the above disclaimer and understand that the author is
680. # i.e. 80 % training dataset and 30 % test datasets
681. experience not only helps retain users but also significantly
682. In the future of Python frameworks like Flask and Django, it is a great option for simple and quick web development. Python enjoys top support for machine learning programs across different programming languages because of its heavyweight libraries such as Keras and TensorFlow. The easy syntax makes it the best programming language of choice for data scientists and ML experts.
683. Any good programmer will tell you that the most important thing to consider is an algorithm's time complexity. One basic yet important operation you are likely to use daily as a data scientist is sorting. For that reason, a good sorting algorithm must be used, and it must have the minimum time complexity.
684. This might look too straightforward, and that's because the drop() method has got some extra arguments:
685. You can call this function in the main program using the following statement:
686. # Function to perform training with entropy.
687. Get ready to unlock the power of AI to read between the lines and understand the emotions behind the words!
688. Now you can apply your knowledge of conditional statements to allow for different ways of measuring up the material. If the breadth of the triangle were too much, it would become a different type of triangle. Therefore, you need to identify the right code that reflects the right conditions. The first step would be to translate your trace values into pseudocode. The following example is about measuring the length of a curtain.
689. This creates a two-dimensional array containing values.
690. Artificial Neural Networks, or ANNs, are paradigms to process information based on how the human brain works. Like a human, an ANN learns by example. They are configured for particular applications, like data classification or pattern recognition, through a learning process that mostly involves adjusting the connections between the neurons.
691. links to maintain a healthy linking profile.
692. Imagine this, your website is about acne, and then, a site talking about car repair links back to a page on your website; do you think Google would pay any special relevance to that backlink? NO. Links from pages relative to your subject hold the ranking relevance.
693. "DataInnovateTech.com" employs AI to dynamically personalize the user experience. The website offers personalized content suggestions and recommendations based on individual user interactions, leading to increased user satisfaction and improved SEO metrics.
694. The Naïve Bayes classifier is not just one algorithm. It is a family of classification algorithms, all based on the Bayes Theorem. They all share one common principle – each features pair being classified is independent of one another.
695. We’ll explore a range of tools available to you, from basic text generators that can help you write articles, to more complex systems that can automate entire processes like content creation, image generation, and even social media posting.
696. If you have any experience using the R language, you will already know that a data frame provides rectangular grids to store data so it can be looked at easily. The rows in the grids all correspond to a measurement or an instance value, and the columns are vectors with data relating to a specific variable. So, there is no need for the rows to contain identical value types, although they can if needed. They can store any type of value, such as logical, character, numeric, etc.
697. The best way to catch these exceptions using an except statement is to list the parameters in a tuple containing all the exceptions to be called. It is best to use the ‘as’ keyword, and this is supported in all versions of Python after version 2. Consider the example below:
698. In this regard, as we stated earlier, you want to concentrate on long tail keywords simply because they are less generic, less competitive, but targeted. To find targeted Long Tail keywords, refer back to the keyword-research guide section.
699. The result shows you a dictionary or list showing Other, Spain, and England, with their player proportions. From here, we can use the Matplotlib pie method to create a pie chart from the dictionary:
700. print ("%d rows have missing values in the train data" %nans)
701. When creating your backlink strategy, remember that creating too many links within a short period may appear spammy. Instead, aim to create natural, high quality backlinks (the keyword here is natural), and pay attention to your social shares and social presence. Put in as much effort in social site content as you do your site content.
702. Andrzej is a seasoned Lead Senior Software Engineer with over two decades of experience in the tech industry. Born and raised in Poland, he discovered his passion for programming at the tender age of 10 when he wrote his first program on an 8-bit ZX Spectrum computer. This early fascination with technology set the stage for a lifelong journey in the world of coding and artificial intelligence.
703. One false statement peddled by SEO ‘gurus’ is that keyword research is the hardest part of SEO. While it does require an infinite amount of time on a continuous basis (search data and volumes change on a daily-monthly basis), coming up with a list of good keywords your website can rank for on the first page of Google SERP is not rocket science. In fact, as the next subsection will show, you can easily come up with a massive list of keywords by following a few simple steps.
704. You can see that the list retains the original order. The sorted() function also accepts the reverse=True argument if you are looking to display a list that is in the reverse alphabetical order.
705. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a comprehensive understanding of Google’s perspective on AI-written content. This knowledge will empower you to make informed decisions
706. We’ll recap the crucial points about using AI in SEO, highlight the importance of staying up-to-date in this fast-changing field, and offer some practical advice on how to keep your AI-powered
707. provides conda and Python, along with many other packages aimed at data science. This is a much larger installation, so make sure you have plenty of free space.
708. The automation was accomplished using the aforementioned RSS Feed with appropriate filters and tools such as n8n, NoCodeDB, MidJourney, GPT-4, Claude, perplexity.ai, and, of course, VPS/Lambda.
709. This chapter will walk you through the information you need to write functions that display information and process data. There may be many other key jobs that your functions may perform. I will explain how you can store functions in separate files known as modules to help organize the major program files.
710. First, import the logistic regression model and use the LogisticRegression() function to create a classifier object. Then you can fit the model using fit() on the training set and use predict() on the test set to make the predictions:
711. There is more to data science than all this, but these are the main areas you should focus on as you start your data science and machine learning journey.
712. on artistic jobs. OpenAI has also introduced watermarks and content filtering to address some of these issues.
713. For example, when you perform ten-fold cross-validation, the data is split into ten parts, roughly equal in size. Models are then trained in sequence – the first fold is used as the test set, while the other nine are used for training. This is repeated for each part, and accuracy estimation is averaged from all ten trials to see how effective the model is.
714. https://whitecube.ai/ai-chatbot-nefi/
715. train.workclass.value_counts(sort=True)
716. ## plotting residual errors in training data
717. print("\t Details of Guns: " + desc.title())
718. Base URL: This URL represents the information on the website, and it is the path that provides details of the functionality of the website. In the above example, the URL is https://realpython.github.io/fake-jobs/
719. I’ve seen many chat solutions that allow for quick retraining on a company’s data (via PDF upload). However, I would advise against such solutions as they might not be sufficiently trained for your industry.
720. As a result, it has become increasingly difficult to distinguish between texts written by humans and those generated by AI. Additionally, as I mentioned in the previous chapter, texts written by generative algorithms are based on vast amounts of data, including huge collections of texts ever written and
721. The tools and techniques currently used to detect AI-written text
722. train = pd.read_csv("~/Adult/train.csv")
723. When you are working on variables in Python, you have to adhere to several guidelines and rules. Breaking these rules will definitely cause certain errors. Different guidelines will help you write code that’s easier to understand and read. However, you need to be sure that you follow a set of rules when naming them.
724. Another popular solution is Leonardo.ai. It’s a very good tool and I definitely recommend it for such applications, but we decided to use MidJourney instead.
725. Before we train our model, the dataset must be split into two – the training and testing sets. To do this, the train_test_split module from sklearn is used. First, the target variable must be split from the dataset attributes:
726. www.yourdomain.com/wp-admin and entering your username and
727. "VisibilityMasters.com" targets a mix of industry-specific short-tail keywords and informative long-tail keywords related to their services, ensuring a broad reach across various user search intents.
728. Again, while there are no hard rules on how often you should publish, problogger.com advocates for 3-5 blogs per week, while the info graphic below, courtesy of hubspot.com, indicates that publishing 16+ blogs per month (an average of 4 or more blogs each week) can get you better rankings and 3.5x more traffic.
729. So, the easiest way to explain supervised learning is to say that the model has x, which is a set of input variables, and y, which is the output variable. An algorithm is used to find the mapping function between x and y, and the relationship is y = f(x).
730. Limit each paragraph to one main idea, and use paragraphs
731. digitized by humans. Such LLM systems typically generate what is most likely or similar to the texts they were trained on.
732. To optimize your content for search engine bots and web-crawlers, the rule of thumb, which is derived from the fact that Google spiders pay attention to these areas, before publishing your content, optimize your Meta data. Specifically, pay special attention to your content title tag and Meta description and ensure these two areas contain the keywords you are targeting and their derivatives.
733. One more question – if machine learning was first mentioned can k in 1959, why has it taken so long to become mainstream? The main reason for this is the significant amount of computing power machine learning requires, not to mention the hardware capable of storing vast amounts of data. It’s only in recent years that we have achieved the requirements needed to practice machine learning.
734. Here, m indicates how many training samples we have, and p is an unknown point. Here’s what we want to do:
735. new keyword ideas, obtain search volume data, and
736. Integrating your site with the webmaster tool, i.e. submitting your sitemap, verifying your site, and using the webmaster tool to monitor your site and implement tips tailor made for your website can greatly affect your page rank position.
737. Of course, the solution we applied, the AI SEO Team, is not the only one on the market. There are plenty of such applications available, but in our case, it was the easiest and quickest to use.
738. IN THE DIGITAL MARKETING LANDSCAPE, WHERE SEARCH ENGINES WIELD UNPARALLELED INFLUENCE, AND MASTERING THE ART OF SEARCH ENGINE OPTIMIZATION (SEO) IS YOUR KEY TO TRIUMPH IN THE ONLINE REALM. IN THE EVEREVOLVING ARENA OF DIGITAL MARKETING, STAYING ABREAST OF THE LATEST DEVELOPMENTS ISN'T JUST A STRATEGY – IT'S AN IMPERATIVE. MEET S. M. ASIF BIN YOUSUF, A SEASONED SEO EXPERT BOASTING A PROVEN TRACK RECORD IN NAVIGATING THE DYNAMIC TERRAINS OF SEARCH ALGORITHMS AND ONLINE VISIBILITY.
739. 10. Conclusion: Embracing the AI Revolution in SEO
740. # Pass the training set through the network.
741. To show you how the decision tree algorithm works, we're going to walk through implementing one on the UCI database, Balance Scale Weight & Distance. The database contains 625 instances – 49 balanced and 288 each to the left and right. There are four numeric attributes and the class name.
742. Practical Applications: The diverse use cases of generative AI in fields such as marketing, medicine, graphic design, and more.
743. print ("%d rows have missing values in the test data" %nand) 2399 rows have missing values in the train data 1221 rows have missing values in the test data
744. When a certain program contains a prominent error, Python will display a traceback error. Python will look through the file and then try to report the problem. The traceback might offer you a clue as to what is wrong with the code and what prevents your program from running.
745. Gaussian Naive Bayes model accuracy(in %): 95.0
746. Verify ownership to gain access to all GMB features. Accurate Business Information:
747. Many other useful methods are available to deal with cases. You can switch the string to all lowercase or all uppercase letters such as the following. I will use the same string to apply the uppercase and lowercase methods. See the following example.
748. We kick off by examining Google’s official announcements regarding AI-written content. You’ll gain a clear understanding of what the search giant considers acceptable and what it frowns upon. This information is vital for anyone looking to integrate AI into their content creation process without risking penalties or reduced visibility in search results.
749. Now go back to the main website we are going to use and explore it. The website is static, and this will not operate at the top of this database. You do not have to worry about working with query parameters since the query does not change.
750. Head Term Keywords, Informational keywords, Long Tail keywords, and Transactional keywords
751. a numeric module containing useful math functions, NumPy is used to manipulate data and read data in NumPy arrays.
752. Data science may be one of the most lucrative careers in the world right now, but it isn't perfect and has its fair share of drawbacks. It wouldn't be right to brag about what data science can do without pointing out its limitations:
753. Machine learning is a bit different. This is all about learning the data science techniques the computers use to learn from the data we give them. We use these technologies to gain outcomes without needing to program any specific laws.
754. Such AI solutions are known as Recommendation AI, and two major companies that offer them as an API are Amazon
755. Without drawing you through all the mathematical details, this is the result:
756. Those two lines of code will separate the dataset. X and Y are both variables – X stores the attributes, and Y stores the dataset's target variable. Next, we need to split the dataset into the training and testing sets:
757. “My uncle’s best habit is that he never stops learning and gaining new knowledge.”
758. This could lead to unfair treatment of certain groups of people.
759. An assumption that there is no dependence between any features pair. For example, a temperature classified as Hot is independent of humidity, and a Rainy outlook is not related to the wind. As such, we assume the features are independent.
760. embodied in critical reviews and certain other
761. Example: "GreenLandscapes," a local landscaping service, maintains
762. maintaining and improving your website's visibility. This tutorial
763. The example content explains the importance of NAP citations, where to establish them, and how to optimize for search engines. It includes a clear example of proper NAP citations for a fictional business, emphasizing the need for consistency across various platforms for effective local SEO.
764. Conduct thorough keyword research to identify high-potential keywords relevant to your content. Focus on both short-tail and long-tail keywords to capture a diverse audience.
765. # creating datasets X containing n_samples
766. As explained, however content is produced, those seeking success in Google Search should be looking to produce original, high-quality, people-first content demonstrating qualities E-E-A-T.
767. To increase website trust and authority, employ author and publisher tags on your content, be active on social media (social mentions), and liaise with influencers and invite them to publish content on your website/platform. Another ideal way to build trust is to have a central publishing voice on your website or blog, i.e. one-person developing content, publishing it, and promoting it on social media platforms.
768. Logarithmic loss is also called logloss, and it is used to measure a classification model's performance where a probability value between 0 and 1 is used as the prediction input. With a divergence between the predicted probability and the actual label,  we saw an increase in log loss. That value needs to be minimized by the machine learning model – the smaller the logloss, the better, and the best models have a log loss of 0.
769. x_train, x_test, y_train, y_test =train_test_split(X,Y, test_size = 0.3, random_state =5)
770. We’ll also tackle the potential challenges you might face when implementing AI in your SEO efforts, offering practical solutions to overcome these hurdles. This includes guidance on maintaining content quality, ensuring originality, and staying compliant with search engine guidelines.
771. How Do Machine Learning and Traditional Programming Differ?
772. INDUS: the proportion of non-retail business acres in each town
773. Data science is a cross-discipline sector that uses huge amounts of data to gain insights. At the same time, machine learning is an exciting subset of data science, used to encourage machines to learn by themselves from the data provided.
774. You can see that I added four key-value pairs to the dictionary, and then I printed the dictionary. I defined the dictionary first that I had to modify by adding new key-value pairs. I defined the keys and then the values for each pair by using the equal sign and the dictionary's name. When I printed the modified dictionary, all the new key-value pairs were added to the dictionary.
775. train[x] = lbl.transform(list(train[x].values))
776. Start by brainstorming a list of potential keywords relevant
777. n this intriguing chapter, we tackle a question that’s on the minds of many SEO professionals and content creators: Is it possible to distinguish between text written by humans and text generated by AI?
778. The example content explores the dynamics of quality vs. quantity in backlink strategies. It acknowledges the allure of quantity, emphasizes the essence of quality, discusses the risks associated with prioritizing quantity over quality, and advocates for striking a thoughtful balance. This content aims to guide SEO practitioners toward a strategic approach that prioritizes the long-term impact of quality backlinks.
779. Enhancing user experience (UX) is integral to retaining visitors and encouraging meaningful interactions on a website. In this guide, we'll explore how "ExperienceOptimized.com" prioritizes user experience to improve engagement and satisfaction.
780. website or application by storing certain elements locally on the
781. Although Generative AI can write an article of any length on any topic you provide, you shouldn’t do this if you want to adhere to the earlier mentioned E-E-A-T standards.
782. To maintain the original order of the list but still keep it sorted, you may use the sorted() function. The sorted() function will let you display the list in a specific order, but it will not affect the original order.
783. This is a readable and more intuitive syntax. It is apparent what we are doing here. You can pass the coluns you want to retain through the argument usecols in the pd.read.csv function if you know the columns which ones they are.
784. Python is a programming language that is highly focused on bringing ease to the users and simplicity to the programmers at the beginner’s level. It allows programmers to write the code in structural, object-oriented, and functional styles. It is presently widely used in several fields like machine learning and developing websites. After the highly famous and used JavaScript, Python is the second most used programming language worldwide.
785. Algorithms need to store huge amounts of training data. Rather than being programmed, an AI program is educated. This means they require vast amounts of data to learn how to do something and execute it at a human level. In many cases, these huge data sets are not easy to generate for specific uses, despite the rapid level at which data is being produced.
786. # Splitting arrays or matrices into random train and test subsets
787. Utilize AI algorithms for content creation. AI can analyze user preferences, search trends, and competitor data to generate relevant and engaging content.
788. We’ll also delve into the implications of this blurring line between human and AI-generated content for SEO, content creation, and digital marketing as a whole. You’ll gain insights into how search engines, readers, and content platforms are adapting to this new reality.
789. Machine learning needs too much time to mark the training data. AI uses supervised learning on a series of deep neural nets. It is critical to label the data in the processing stage, and this is done using predefined goal attributes taken from historical data. Marking the data is where the data is cleaned and sorted to allow the neural nets to work on it.
790. It also helps if you switch back between the inspect elements and the browser to explore how the page works. This is the best way to find the elements you want to use to perform the scraping. To find the relevant information, look for the <div> object followed by the ID name. Look for the combination with the result or assignment value as “ResultsContainer.” There are other attributes in these elements. For a better understanding, consider the following lines of code:
791. Logistic Regression Machine Learning Algorithm
792. This is easier for you to read, and the information also contains the necessary information you need to determine if you want to apply to the role. That said, you can also look for software developer roles, and the results will contain the information you need about developers in all fields.
793. We’ll dive into popular text-to-text generators, exploring how they can help you create content more efficiently. We’ll also look at text-to-image tools that can enhance your visual content strategy. But we won’t stop there - we’ll also introduce you to more advanced solutions like AI-powered customer support chatbots, recommendation systems, and comprehensive SEO analytics tools.
794. there are tons of machine learning algorithms, and you need to have knowledge of how they operate to know which one to use for each scenario. You will need knowledge of quadratic programming, gradient descent, convex optimization, partial differential equations, and other similar topics.
795. Dictionaries are pairs of keys and values
796. By reading this document, the reader agrees that under no circumstances are we responsible for any losses, direct or indirect, which are incurred as a result of the use of information contained within this document, including, but not limited to, —errors, omissions, or inaccuracies.
797. But don’t worry if this sounds complex! We’ll break down each process step-by-step, explaining how you can implement these strategies regardless of your technical background. We’ll also discuss the tools and platforms that can help you achieve full automation, and how to choose the right ones for your specific needs.
798. Maintain consistent formatting, ensure accurate information, complete profiles, and monitor for corrections.
799. : one assumption is that the output variable, y, has no error. You should remove outliers and potentially misclassified data from your training data right from the start.
800. Engine Optimization) is crucial for achieving and maintaining high
801. - This is a general chatbot that can be quickly trained on your knowledge base, whether it’s a PDF document, a website, or a text file. It’s a general chat from the company that I’ve used, adapted for my industry. What I like about it is its speed and lightweight nature, with minimal JS and CSS, making it highly optimized and importantly, won’t impact our website’s performance, which is crucial for SEO. The downside is, of course, that it’s a general-purpose chat.
802. In the early days, SEO primarily focused on keyword stuffing and meta tags. Websites aimed to manipulate search engine algorithms by using excessive keywords, often resulting in poor user experiences.
803. In comparison to paid advertising, the organic traffic generated through SEO proves to be a cost-effective method for attracting visitors. Once a page is optimized and achieves a favorable ranking, it can consistently draw in organic traffic without incurring ongoing costs per click.
804. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a solid understanding of the key principles that will help you navigate the exciting world of AI-powered SEO. So, let’s dive in and cement those crucial points that will set you up for success in your digital marketing journey!
805. Utilize data to offer personalized content recommendations. Tailor the user experience based on past interactions and preferences.
806. A dictionary containing lists, Series, dictionaries or one-dimensional ndarrays
807. It is fast becoming popular to interpret huge amounts of data and helping to automate the tasks that data scientists do daily. It's fair to say that machine learning has changed the way we extract data and visualize it. Given how much businesses rely on data these days, data-driven decisions help determine if a company is likely to succeed or fall behind its competitors.
808. algorithm changes is essential for maintaining and improving your
809. Let’s kick off this section by getting our facts right: while link building is a detrimental factor, and a mainstay of off-page SEO, Off-page SEO does not eat, drink, and breath back linking.
810. introduction to WordPress, explaining its features, advantages, and
811. You can use the loops to display all the keys in perfect order. A dictionary usually maintains a formal connection between the keys and the values. However, it is unlikely that you get the items from the dictionary in a predictable order. This is not a problem because you will need to obtain the accurate value that is linked with each key. One way to get everything in perfect order is to sort out the keys as they are returned through the loop.
812. Content created with the aid of Generative AI can be partially or fully automated, allowing for the production of a high volume of quality blog posts or social media updates. What do you think will happen if your competitors begin releasing one or two valuable posts daily while you continue to post sporadically, maybe once or twice a month?
813. def train(self, inputs, outputs, training_iterations):
814. A page title, also known as a title tag, is the main heading that
815. The evolution of SEO continues with the rise of voice search and artificial intelligence (AI). Optimizing content for voice queries and understanding user intent have become essential for staying ahead in search rankings.
816. The applications of Python are endless. Artificial Intelligence systems tend to learn from the data that you feed to them. This is similar to the human brain. Machine learning models also work on data. Although they are not as efficient as artificial intelligence models, they also have wider applications. They are used in the manufacturing industry where human labor cannot work. They can handle bigger robotic machines and wrap up complicated tasks in a simple and fast manner.
817. The training dataset needs to be divided into subsets, ensuring that each one has the same attribute value
818. Each object in a class is equipped with a behavior. You can give each object a bunch of unique traits as per your will. You may be amazed at how well you can model some real-world situations in your codes. The process of creating an object inside of a class is called instantiation.
819. With a structured array, a user can manipulate data via fields, each named differently. The example below shows a structured array being created containing three tuples. Each tuple's first element is called foo and is the int type. The second element is a float called bar.
820. Pepper is not available at the store right now.
821. Machin learning needs sufficient time for the algorithms to learn and develop to ensure they can do their job with a significant level of relevancy and accuracy. They also require a high level of resources which can mean using more computer power than you might have available.
822. train.occupation.value_counts(sort=True)
823. A matrix can only be an IMatrix when the 1s appear on the main diagonal, no other.
824. It would be fair to say that there are three main components in a Pandas DataFrames – data, index, and columns.
825. The term “machine learning” was first coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel, an AI and computer gaming pioneer who defined it as “a field of study that provides computers with the capability of learning without explicit programming.”
826. The NumPy library is top of the pile when it comes to sorting an array's elements, with a decent range of sorting functions on offer.  And when you use the sort() method, you can also use mergesort, heapsort, and timesort, all available in NumPy, under the hood.
827. In the tug-of-war between quality and quantity, quality emerges as the true champion. While quantity might provide a temporary boost, it's the quality of backlinks that sustains and elevates your website's authority in the eyes of search engines. The path to SEO success lies in a thoughtful and strategic balance.
828. the algorithm is trained on various labels to identify things in a particular category, i.e., cats or dogs, oranges or apples, etc.
829. Jaiswal, S. (2017, December 8). Python Data Structures Tutorial. Datacamp. https://www.datacamp.com/community/tutorials/data-structures-python
830. tailors search results to create what it thinks is the best
831. This begs the question; what back linking option is available to webmasters, and how can you build penalty-free backlinks guaranteed to help you rank better? Here is how.
832. If you run this script one more time, you will see the code has changed and updated. This new code can now access the information on the website. It is because you can loop the header elements using the <div class = “card-content”> module, and if you use the . parent attribute, you can obtain some information about the structure of the elements.
833. the AI chat replied within seconds. Previously, most customers probably gave up before getting any response.
834. Finally, in 2020, GPT-3 was released, arguably the most powerful language model in the world. Released by OpenAI, the model could generate fully functioning code, write creative fiction, write good business memos, and so much more, with its use cases only limited by imagination.
835. The API also offers access to additional parameters not available in the web interface, such as temperature control.
836. marketing, email marketing, and online advertising, will
837. - The last solution on my list. It’s another general-purpose chatbot quite popular in the market, offering the ability to input documents containing our company’s knowledge base.
838. Conduct keyword research focusing on long-tail, conversational phrases that users are likely to speak. Consider questions and answers that align with your content.
839. elcome to the final chapter of our journey through AI and SEO! In this chapter, we’re going to wrap up everything we’ve learned and focus on the most important takeaways. Think of it as your quick reference guide for the future.
840. the competitive advantages AI offers and why embracing this technology is crucial for maintaining a strong online presence in today’s digital world.
841. print(self.eagle_name.title() + " is sitting at the moment on the top of the mountain.")
842. Again, the result would be a dictionary containing the ten most common nationalities in order of the most values to the least.
843. This is used to help understand how the trained classifier behaves over the test dataset or help validate the dataset.
844. Text-to-text generative AI is a tool where we can simply input a news topic we got from a Google News RSS feed, and in return, we get text that we can extend as much as we like by asking it to continue generating.
845. - Complete Profiles: Fill out your profiles on directories with additional business details.
846. Plugins: With over 55,000 plugins available, WordPress allows
847. Next, we want to know how well the model has performed. The best way to know that is to test it on more data. This is the testing data, and it must be completely different from the data the algorithm was trained on. When you train a model, you do not intend it to learn the values in the training data. Instead, you want it to learn the data’s underlying pattern and use that to make predictions on previously unseen data. We’ll discuss this more in the next section.
848. Logistic regression makes assumptions about data distribution and relationships which are similar to those made by linear regression. Much work has gone into the definition of these assumptions, and they are written in precise statistical and probabilistic language. My advice? Use these as rules of thumb or guidelines, and don't be afraid to experiment with preparation schemes.
849. that analyzed content length by domain age, name, new and old blogs, etc. longer content generally ranks higher than shorter content. The idea behind this ranking factor is simple: longer content= detailed content=equal to better answers for users, which as we saw, Google places a lot of emphasis on.
850. # Train the neural network and adjust the weights each time.
851. long-tail keywords that include your location and specific services
852. - Facebook: Coastal Coffee Haven - 123 Main St, Suite 101, Seaside Town
853. introduces you to data science and machine learning
854. The first rule is that the names of variables should only contain numbers, letters, and underscores. They may start with an underscore and a letter but never with a number. For example, you can write mg1 but not 1mg. You cannot add spaces to the names of variables, but you can use underscores to create separation between words in the names of variables. For example, you can write mg_morning, but you cannot write mg morning. It will trigger an immediate error.
855. This is all about AI understanding and using human language:
856. X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(
857. The dtype is present in the column, which is a string object. You can obtain the numerical version of that object using the pd.to.numeric function.
858. . It’s vitally important to either gain the necessary knowledge yourself
859. Analyzing social media trends: AI can look at millions of posts to see how people feel about current events or popular topics. It’s like having a magic thermometer that can measure the mood of the whole internet!
860. Personalizing ads: AI can help show different ads to different people based on what they like.
861. This convergence of human and machine input in text creation has led to a new era in digital communication. The boundary between human creativity and machine efficiency is increasingly blurred. Writers and content creators are now collaborating with AI in ways that enhance productivity, accuracy, and creativity. AI tools can suggest word choices, provide stylistic recommendations, and even generate entire paragraphs based on the context provided by the human writer.
862. Fill in the details in the schema markup generator online
863. . Brainstorm Potential Keywords
864. Here is the detail of the key feature of your player: Gun Color.
865. Next, the results gained from data science can be used in just about every field, from schooling to banking, healthcare to tourism, etc. Data science allows a business to see problems and respond to them accordingly.
866. In reinforcement learning, models are trained to provide decisions based on a reward/feedback system. They are left to learn how to achieve a goal in complex situations and, whenever they achieve the goal during the learning, they are rewarded.
867. ============= RESTART: C:\Users\saifia computers\Desktop\python.py =============
868. The books in the above list were published at the same time and place. However, one has a hyphen and the other does not include it. You can use the str.contains() function to clean the data in the column in one shot. Use the code below to clean the data in the columns:
869. Thanks to Generative AI, you can quickly and easily produce valuable content for your customers and users. This content can be based on your data, previous writings, or even integrated directly with your product database to generate content alongside new products, promotions, and sales.
870. Using Seaborn to Generate Pairs Plot
871. In this example, the Explained Variance Score is used to determine the accuracy score.
872. Design new medicines: AI can suggest new combinations of chemicals that might make good medicines.
873. information such as location, contact details, and business hours.
874. Use AI algorithms to recommend relevant content to users, increasing the likelihood of prolonged engagement and reduced bounce rates.
875. By the end of this chapter, you’ll have a comprehensive understanding of the AI tools available for SEO, enabling you to make informed decisions about which solutions to incorporate into your strategy. So, let’s dive in and discover the AI-powered tools that can take your SEO to the next level!
876. One of the most crucial aspects we’ll cover is Google’s stance on AI-created content. As the biggest search engine, Google’s opinion can make or break your website’s success. We’ll break down what Google has officially said about AI content and what it means for your SEO strategy.
877. How to strike a balance between AI efficiency and meeting Google’s quality standards
878. A string cannot be edited in one place. You may have understood this by now. Python has numerous methods that can be used to edit strings and obtain different results.
879. The math behind maximum-likelihood is out of the scope of this book. Still, it is sufficient to say that minimization algorithms are used to optimize the coefficient's best values for the training data.
880. For instance, there’s an AI that helped design a new antibiotic to fight bacteria that other medicines couldn’t beat. It’s like having a super-smart scientist working non-stop to help keep people healthy!
881. with a list of relevant websites. SEO aims to improve your website's
882. The dataset must be divided into a training and test dataset. We do that with the train_test_split function, passing three parameters – features, target, test_set_size. You can also use random_state to choose records randomly:
883. Some of the many uses of machine learning in the real world include text generation, image recognition, and so on, this increasing the scope, ensuring machine learning experts become highly sought after individuals.
884. If you are dealing with a large body of text like the following example, you may wish to deal with it in smaller pieces. file.readline([size]) reads a single line from the file (up to the next newline character, \n). An incomplete line may be returned in an iteration. The size argument is defined as the number of bytes that the interpreter must read. The bytes also include the trailing newline. If the interpreter reaches the end of the file, an empty string is returned.
885. Now buckle up and settle in. The next part is by far the longest as we dive deep into the most important subset of data science – machine learning.
886. The training samples are stored in arr[], which is an array containing data points. Each of the array elements represents (x, y), which is a tuple.
887. a recent study by KISSmetrics detailing
888. Your Meta Title is visible to users and search engine spiders and it is your first SEO infantry. If you fail to keyword optimize your title tag, you are dooming your content or website to SEO jail. If you head to Google and perform a random search, the Meta Title is the title text in the resulting search results.
889. Let’s dive straight into this with an example.
890. How to Brainstorm a List of Keywords
891. The characteristics of AI-generated text and how they compare to human-written content
892. The evolution of Google’s position on AI content over time
893. The result tells us the flower classification is the setosa type. Note that the dataset contains three types – Setosa, Vericolor, and Virginia.
894. Typically, we gather about 5 to 10 extra sources. We collect all these texts and, using Claude, we compile them into one comprehensive piece, giving our blog post not only a broad but a thorough approach to the topic. This way, with the right prompts, the resulting blog post contains reliable information from various perspectives.
895. language models have been refined, prompts improved, and as people increasingly use auto-correction tools, style enhancers, and grammar editors like MS Word or Grammarly, it has become nearly impossible to distinguish AI-generated texts from human-written ones.
896. Here again, one might wonder why not just use an image from the RSS feed we get from Google. And once again, I strongly advise against this approach, as it could get you into a lot of trouble.
897. print("\t Details of Desserts: " + desc1.title())
898. This will prevent broken links, maintain SEO value, and ensure
899. to navigate the complex world of AI-generated content and its detectability.
900. 5. How to Leverage the AI Revolution in SEO
901. Here, the compiler will assume it has reached the end of the string when it reaches only the end of the text at the end of the second set of double quotes in the string above. This indicates that the ‘how to’ phrase is a part of the main string, including the quotes. In this way, you can have at least one level of nested quotes. The best way to understand the use of nested quotes is to experiment with strings.
902. When you use the buffering argument, you can either use the w or a object mode. The values for these should either be 0 or 1. If it is 0, your data is written straight to your hard drive. If it is 1, Python creates a temporary file to store the text in before it gets written out. The compiler will not write this information to the disk unless you call the functions file.flush() or file.close() explicitly. You may not use this option in most cases.
903. Machine learning is another buzzword, a subset of data science that has only really become popular in the last couple of decades. Machine learning is all about training machines to think like humans, to make decisions like a human would and, although true human thought is still some way off for machines, it is improving by the day.
904. , naturally place your main keywords and LSI keywords (latent semantic keywords are keywords similar to your main keyword) in these tags.
905. Google My Business optimization is an ongoing process that directly impacts your local search visibility. By claiming your business, ensuring accurate information, crafting compelling descriptions, showcasing high-quality visuals, and actively managing reviews, you position your business for success in the competitive local landscape.
906. >>> oxford = pub.str.contains('Oxford')
907. . Claim Your Listing: Go to the Google My Business website and
908. This is a not so nicely named free keyword research tool that produces long tail keyword ideas once you input a keyword phrase. What
909. Adding elements to Python lists is also quite easy. You might need to add new elements to a specific list for different reasons. As I have explained earlier, if you are developing a game with a player who fights a battle, you need to know how to add elements to allow the player to pick up or buy different guns.
910. goals for each content piece: to educate, entertain, inspire, or
911. Linear Regression Machine Learning Algorithm
912. learn about AI because new applications are being discovered all the time!
913. In terms of services, most businesses use chatbots to ensure that they are available 24/7. And some are so intelligent that many customers don’t even realize they are not chatting to a real human being.
914. print("Gaussian Naive Bayes model accuracy(in %):", metrics.accuracy_score(y_test, y_pred)*100)
915. We didn’t have to wait long for Google to notice these posts. Although the content isn’t as unique as when it’s generated based on a product feed, the use of multiple sources and a thorough approach still makes it valuable enough and written differently enough that Google started appreciating it and directing some traffic our way.
916. There are a few Naïve Bayes classifiers, and their main difference is via the assumptions about the P(x
917. Quantifying the model performance requires the use of evaluation metrics, and which ones you use depend on what kind of task you are doing – regression, classification, clustering, and so on. Some metrics are good for multiple tasks, such as precision-recall. Classification, regression, and other supervised learning tasks make up the largest number of machine learning applications, so we will concentrate on regression and classification
918. So, this raises a critical question: If text written by a machine (an LLM model) is indistinguishable from text written by a human, what does this mean for internet search engines, for Google?
919. Techniques for providing examples to improve AI performance
920. This is the final tool we'll look at – a method called pairplot – which allows for a matrix of distributions to be generated, along with a scatter plot for a specified numerical feature set. We'll do this with three columns:
921. Implement AI-powered systems that personalize content based on user behavior, preferences, and past interactions. This improves user engagement and encourages longer sessions.
922. Stay informed: The field of AI is rapidly evolving. Make it a habit to stay updated on the latest developments and how they might impact SEO.
923. Generative AI is like a super creative artist that never gets tired. It can:
924. Python objects are pointers to memory locations where object details are stored. These details include the value and the number of bytes. This additional information is part of the reason why Python is classed as a dynamically typed language, but it also comes with an additional cost. That cost becomes clear when large object collections, such as arrays are stored.
925. To avoid all these issues, we decided to create our own images. As you probably know, there are many tools available for this. Initially, we planned to use Dall-E, but the quality of the generated photos and images wasn’t good enough for us.
926. #train the model on training data
927. There were different proprietary languages, but it was a bit difficult for them to gain popularity. Guido knew that the idea of open-sourcing was the only viable way to make Python a success.
928. The human brain is filled with billions and billions of neurons connected to one another via synapses. These are the connections by which neurons send impulses to other neurons. When one neuron sends a signal to another, the signal gets added to the neuron's inputs. Once a specified threshold is exceeded, the target neuron fires a signal forward. That is pretty much how the internal thinking process happens.
929. We used a ratio of 75:25 to break the dataset – 75% training data and 25% testing data.
930. We’ll also look at some real-world examples of AI implementations gone wrong and learn from these experiences. You’ll discover practical tips on how to set up safeguards and checks in your AI processes to prevent errors and ensure your content remains valuable and compliant with search engine guidelines.
931. File "C:\Users\saifia computers\Desktop\python.py", line 4, in <module>
932. train.workclass.fillna('Private',inplace=True)
933. # Print out `df` again to see the changes
934. Information: The URL query parameters have the relevant information that constitutes the parameters in the pairs of information. These pairs are called key-value pairs. These pairs are related to the queries run
935. In a well-prepared workflow, AI-generated text is just one small component. Proper automation should at least incorporate these elements:
936. There are numerous SEO tools available that can help you
937. Example: Consider a retail business. Through effective SEO, the business can appear on the first page of search results when potential customers search for relevant products. This increased visibility leads to more clicks and potential conversions.
938. Support Vector Machine Learning Algorithm
939. Long tail keywords are more like phrases, or sentences. Long tail keywords are very specific and targeted. For instance, using our acne example, an example of a long tail keyword would be “how to cure acne without medication.”
940. Claim and Verify Your Business:
941. Learning from Data: How generative AI uses large datasets to recognize patterns and generate new, similar content.
942. Good keywords, the ones you remain with at the end of the 4-step keyword research guide should be highly relevant. They should accurately describe the content of your articles because a high bounce rate, i.e. the rate at which users leave your page after landing on it is yet another external ranking factor. By being specific, your keywords and their subsequent use ensures that users find answers to their pressing questions once they land on your page or content.
943. The conditionals have some other important jobs to do as well. Sometimes you feel the need to check if a list contains a specific value before you take an action. For example, you might need to check if a certain bike vegetable exists in a list of vegetables. For example, if you develop a grocery app with a list of vegetables, you can use the conditionals to let users know if a certain vegetable exists in the list or not.
944. Let's say we want to predict the output, using specified inputs and outputs as training examples.
945. This is the first and most important step in machine learning and is by far the most time-consuming. It involves collecting all the data needed to solve the problem and enough of it. For example, let’s say we wanted to build a model that predicted house prices. In that case, we need a dataset with information about previous sales, which we can use to form a tabular structure. We’ll solve something similar when we show you how to implement a regression problem later.
946. keyword to combine the conditional tests. If each test passes, the overall expression will be evaluated to be True. If either or both tests fail, the expression will be evaluated to be False.
947. Thanks again for downloading this book. I hope it helps you fill in any SEO gaps you may have.
948. Maybe one day you’ll help create the next big algorithm that makes AI even smarter!
949. "Campaigns" > "Organic Keywords" section. Look for keywords driving the
950. You now have an idea about the type of information you are working with. You also know the details of the website you are working with. The first thing to do is to understand the HTML code and move that information onto the Python script you write. It is important to understand how you can work with the HTML elements. We are going to use the requests library in Python for this task.
951. Critical values should be worked out early on in the design process so that the program can be properly tested against them. In the calculation of the area of the triangle, the value that most needs taking into account is that of the breadth, which has been set at 14 cm. Allowing 8 cm means that the maximum breadth of the triangle can only be 8 cm.
952. The Python language started shaping up nicely with perfect principles and priorities. A fine example of the principles of Python is Python’s Zen, a certain set of aphorisms from a software engineer, namely Tom Peters. The Zen carries Python’s core philosophy.
953. The error is calculated. This is the difference between the actual and expected output. Depending on what the error is, the weights can be adjusted. To do this, multiply the error by the input and then do it again with sigmoid curve gradient:
954. Emergence of Voice Search and AI:
955. However, it’s important to remember that AI is a tool, not a replacement for human creativity and strategic thinking. The most successful SEO strategies will be those that combine the efficiency and data-processing power of AI with human insight, creativity, and ethical considerations.
956. Gaussian Naive Bayes classifier
957. In conclusion, this chapter underscores the transformative impact of AI on text creation. While AI enhances efficiency and quality, it also challenges traditional notions of authorship and authenticity. As we embrace this new era, it is crucial to find a balance that leverages both human creativity and machine intelligence, fostering a collaborative future in digital writing.
958. you enhance user experience and gain favour with search
959. - Local businesses that have claimed their Google My Business profiles and optimized them with accurate information, photos, and reviews often appear prominently in local search results.
960. Below is a list of AI chatbots for general use, which I generally advise against using. However, each of them has the capability of what I call ‘quick learning’. They can incorporate data from your company/industry as the foundational knowledge base for the chat. While not a fully dedicated solution that I strongly recommend, it’s not entirely generic either. At least it will be equipped with basic knowledge and terminology.
961. Be transparent: If you’re using AI-generated content, consider being open about it. Transparency can help build trust with your audience.
962. https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2023/02/google-search-and-ai-content
963. In 2016, Google DeepMind researchers created AlphaGo to play the ancient Chinese game, Go, and pitted it against the world champion, Lee Sedol. AlphaGo beat the reigning world champion four times out of five.
964. Sklearn has support for the Information Gain's "entropy" criteria. If we need the Information Gain method from sklearn, it must be explicitly mentioned.
965. Python DataFrames are much the same. They are included in the Pandas library, defined as two-dimensional data structures, labeled, and with columns containing possible different types.
966. . Product: Use this markup for e-commerce websites to provide details
967. The ROC or Receiver Operating Characteristic curve plots the true against the false positive rate and shows the tradeoff between specificity and sensitivity.
968. The first step is downloading the official Python .exe installer. After you have installed it, you need to run it on your system. The version depends on what you need to do with Python. If you have been working on a certain project coded in Python version 2.6, you might need this version. If you are just starting a project from scratch, you have the freedom to choose.
969. Challenges of Originality and Authenticity: The chapter raises important questions about the true authorship of AI-assisted content, emphasizing the need to balance AI’s capabilities with the preservation of human creativity and originality.
970. Different Types of Machine Learning
971. neural_network.train(inputs, outputs, 10000)
972. Python is considered the most widely used programming language. It has gained popularity and is also considered one of the most flexible and highly popular server-side programming languages. Unlike most of the distributions of Linux, Windows does not have any pre-installed version of Python. However, you can install it on your local machine or Windows server in a few easy steps.
973. : This one is major. Google uses backlinks as votes of confidence: more domains linking back to your site=better rankings.
974. capital.gain 32561 non-null int64
975. Any perceptive SEO professional will tell you that although off-page SEO is a major ranking determinant factor, it should only take about 30-40% of your search engine optimization efforts, with the remaining percentage going to on-page SEO.
976. Through this book, Andrzej shares his expertise and passion, hoping to inspire and guide others in leveraging the power of AI for SEO and content creation. His practical, hands-on approach makes complex topics accessible, reflecting his belief that with the right tools and knowledge, anyone can harness the potential of AI to revolutionize their digital strategies.
977. The variety and types of links pointing back to your site matters a great deal. You should aim to create a variety of links. Thanks to Google Penguin, too many links of a similar type may appear spammy and negatively affect your ranking. For instance, having too many homepage links and no other page links may also appear spammy. One thing you should note is that Google does not advocate for link building. Instead, they advocate for natural back linking that provide value to their customers.
978. Section 2: Detailed Video Descriptions
979. Throughout the chapter, we’ll provide real-world examples and case studies that illustrate successful implementations of AI-generated content within Google’s guidelines. These insights will help you navigate the sometimes tricky waters of AI and SEO.
980. Does Google have its own methods for detecting AI-generated content?
981. Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names used in this book and on its cover are trade names, service marks, trademarks and registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publishers and the book are not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. None of the companies referenced within the book have endorsed the book.
982. Real-world examples and case studies of AI detection in action
983. Message: "I can't stand waiting in long lines at the grocery store"
984. Random Forest Machine Learning Algorithm
985. SEO is all about optimization: without keywords, optimization is impossible. Website and content optimization starts at keyword research. Once you identify the keywords you aim to rank for, to make your website and content relative to those search terms, you have to optimize your content around these keywords.
986. , Heartbeat, 16 Apr. 2019, heartbeat.fritz.ai/introduction-to-machine-learning-model-evaluation-fa859e1b2d7f.
987. Marketing agencies now employ a whole array of tools to enhance grammar and style. These range from well-known resources like Grammarly to less familiar or specialized AI-based solutions and large language models (LLMs).
988. Bell Pepper is not available at the store right now.
989. However, this method has one primary drawback – the original array must contain the axis along which you are combining, or else you will get an error.
990. 3. Maintain Consistency in Heading Levels: Maintaining
991. often called the backbone of a business, data engineers create databases to store data, designing them for the best use, and manage them. Their job entails data pipeline design, ensuring the data flows adequately, and getting to where it needs to be.
992. “Machine Learning Algorithms with Python.”
993. If you were to change these values and submit them in the search box, it would reflect directly in the parameters in the URL. The reverse is also possible. If you want to change any of these, you will notice a different result on this website. From the above URL, you can see that the information has changed based on the information or details you want to receive from the data set.
994. Another way to address the lack of a product feed is to utilize a news feed. This could be any paid news feed or even a free RSS News Feed from Google News, with necessary filters applied to ensure only industry-relevant news reaches us.
995. The machine learning model is created, and a baseline model set that you want to be achieved
996. Before you can optimize your GMB listing, you need to claim and verify your business. This involves confirming that you are the rightful owner and have the authority to manage the business on Google. Once verified, you gain access to the full suite of features to enhance your online presence. Section 2: Accurate Business Information
997. So, let’s dive in and learn how to use AI in SEO responsibly and effectively, avoiding the common pitfalls that could hinder your success!
998. Because multiplying an array containing a scalar value is more efficient than multiplying another array.
999. train['native.country'].fillna('United-States',inplace=True)
1000. Imagine having a super-smart, super-creative helper that can assist with almost anything. That’s what generative AI might be like in the future!
1001. Cross-validation allows us to test the model while training, checking for overfitting, and looking to see how the model will generalize on the test data. Cross-validation can also compare how different models perform on the same data set and helps us choose the best parameter values to ensure the maximum possible model accuracy. This is also known as parameter tuning.
1002. Thank you again for downloading this book!
1003. First, it gives businesses a better way of identifying who their customers are. Given that customers keep a business's wheels turning, they determine whether that business fails or succeeds. With data science, businesses can now communicate with customers in the right way, in different ways for different customers.
1004. Common Machine Learning Algorithms
1005. The accuracy and uniformity of your business information across online platforms contribute to search engine trust. Inconsistent NAP details confuse both users and search engines, potentially leading to decreased visibility in local search results. Consistent NAP citations act as digital breadcrumbs, guiding search engines to validate your business information.
1006. According to Google, to nail your off-page ranking, concentrate on on-page SEO by producing great content that others want to link back to.
1007. # If remainder is 1, the number is odd.
1008. print("\n" + "Here is the detail of the key feature of your player: " + feature.title() + ".")
1009. Data science is quickly gaining traction in just about every market and is now a critical part of how products are developed. That has led to a rise in the need for data scientists to help manage data and find the answers to some of the more complex problems a business faces.
1010. Cognizant of the fact that most users access the web from their mobile devices, in the week following April 21 2015, Google made mobile friendliness one of their ranking factors. Today, having, or failure to have a mobile optimized site is surely bound to affect a website’s rank.
1011. Content Creation: Generative AI’s ability to create various forms of art and media, like articles, poetry, and music.
1012. The chapter also delves into the history of generative AI, from early neural networks in the 1950s to the introduction of significant models like GANs in the 2010s. It explains important algorithms and techniques, including Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), Variational Autoencoders (VAEs), Transformer Models, and Deep Convolutional Networks (DCNs).
1013. Andrew Bus has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party Internet Websites referred to in this publication and does not guarantee that any content on such Websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
1014. Handling how your machine learning model performs requires evaluation, an integral part of any data science project you are involved in. When you evaluate the model, you aim to estimate how accurate the model's generalization is on unseen data.
1015. The entire training set is considered as the root at the start of the process.
1016. With Python, you get the flexibility to choose between scripting and object-oriented programming. You don’t need to recompile any code – the changes can be implemented, and the results are shown instantly. It is the most versatile of all the programming languages and is multi-platforms, which is why it works so well for machine learning and data science.
1017. By learning about these algorithms, we can understand how AI is able to be so creative. It’s not magic - it’s clever math and lots of practice with huge amounts of information. And who knows?
1018. powerful tools, offering detailed insights into your website's
1019. Brief summaries that provide an overview of the page's content. Example: "Explore effective digital marketing strategies tailored for small businesses in this comprehensive guide."
1020. Since lists are ordered data types, you can retrieve and store data items in a specific order. The main models you can use to perform this function are termed stacks and queues.
1021. All these inventions have led to today’s artificial intelligence that can do amazing things - write stories, paint pictures, and even compose music. It’s still not as good as real artists, but it’s getting better every year!
1022. Best practices would include establishing a clear AI usage policy, regularly reviewing and updating AI systems in line with technological advancements, and maintaining an ethical approach to AI use. Encouraging openness about the use of AI in creative processes and setting realistic expectations about the outcomes will also play a critical role in integrating these technologies into business operations smoothly and ethically.
1023. Thank you once again for choosing my guide, and I wish you luck in your data science journey.
1024. In this book, we examine AI tools and models specifically in terms of their application to SEO. For this reason, I’ve outlined two main types. First, there are base models, which are general-purpose tools or models. We can use these for working on our website’s SEO, but they’re not specifically designed for this purpose. Second, we have dedicated or integrated tools, which combine various models and systems specifically for SEO tasks.
1025. For instance, if AI can write news articles, what will happen to journalists?
1026. This part is important because, no matter how you look at it, the keyword research process always starts at understanding your niche, which helps you brainstorm a list of possible keyword ideas your target audience uses when searching for information online.
1027. results = soup.find(id="ResultsContainer")
1028. 1. Utilize the <h1> Tag for the Main Heading: The <h1> tag should
1029. We might see AI that can create entire movies or video games based just on a story idea.
1030. AI is making games more fun and helping people learn in new ways:
1031. More often, you have to test multiple possible situations. In this kind of scenario, you have to use the if-elif-else syntax. Python will execute just one block of code in the if-elif-else chain. It will run the conditional test until one test passes. When one passes, the code linked to that test will pass. Python will skip everything else.
1032. There are several reasons for storing different sets of numbers. You may need to keep track of the enemies in a battle game. You may need to point out the number of targets in the game. Lists are perfect for storing numbers, and Python offers a set of tools to help you work efficiently with numerical lists. Once you have understood how to use the tools correctly, your code will work perfectly when the lists you are working on contains millions of items.
